Two obligatory Isms:         Why Pluralism and Secularism are essential for our Democracy   It is a privilege to be invited to this most prestigious of law schools in the country, more so for someone not formally lettered in the discipline of law.
I thank the Director and the faculty for this honour.
Instead, my effort today would be to explore the practical implications that some constitutional principles, legal dicta and judicial pronouncements have for the lives of citizens.
I recall John Locke’s dictum that ‘wherever law ends, tyranny begins.’
II  The People of India gave themselves a Republic that is Sovereign, Socialist, Secular and Democratic and a constitutional system with its focus on Justice, Liberty, Equality and Fraternity.
These have been embodied in a set of institutions and laws, conventions and practices.
Our founding fathers took cognizance of an existential reality.
Ours is a plural society and a culture imbued with considerable doses of syncretism.
Religious minorities constitute 19.4 percent of the total.
It is this plurality that the Constitution endowed with a democratic polity and a secular state structure.
Pluralism in this modern sense presupposes citizenship.’
The positive part of secularism has been entrusted to the State to regulate by law or by an executive order.
The State is prohibited to patronise any particular religion as State religion and is enjoined to observe neutrality.
Programmes or principles evolved by political parties based on religion amount to recognizing religion as a part of the political governance which the Constitution expressly prohibits.
It violates the basic features of the Constitution.
A question is often raised about national integration.
Conceptually and practically, integration is not synonymous with assimilation or homogenization.
On procedural count the system has developed roots with regularity of elections, efficacy of the electoral machinery, an ever increasing percentage of voter participation in the electoral process and the formal functioning of legislatures thus elected.
In electoral terms, ‘majority’ is numerical majority as reflected in a particular exercise (e.g.
election), does not have permanence and is generally time-specific; the same holds for ‘minority’.
Both find reflection in value judgments.
These too bring forth value judgments.
The question then is whether in regard to ‘citizenship’ under our Constitution with its explicit injunctions on rights and duties, any value judgments should emerge from expressions like ‘majority’ and ‘minority’ and the associated adjectives like ‘majoritarian’ and ‘majorityism’ and ‘minoritarian’ and ‘minorityism’?
Record shows that these have divisive implications and detract from the Preamble’s quest for ‘Fraternity’.
Within the same ambit, but distinct from it, is the constitutional principle of equality of status and opportunity, amplified through Articles 14, 15, and 16.
This would be an effective way of giving shape to Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s policy of Sab Ka Saath Sab Ka Vikas.
The two approaches are to be parallel, not sequential.
Both necessitate avoidance of sophistry in discourse or induction of personal inclinations in State practice.
A more diligent promotion of fraternity, and of our composite culture, in terms of Article 51A (e) and (f) is clearly required.
It needs to be done in practice by leaders and followers.
A commonplace suggestion is advocacy of tolerance.
Tolerance is a virtue.
It is freedom from bigotry.
Yet tolerance alone is not a strong enough foundation for building an inclusive and pluralistic society.
It must be coupled with understanding and acceptance.
We must, said Swami Vivekananda, ‘not only tolerate other religions, but positively embrace them, as truth is the basis of all religions.’
Acceptance goes a step beyond tolerance.
It has to become an essential national virtue to promote harmony transcending sectional diversities.
The political immobility in relation to Jammu and Kashmir is disconcerting.
I refer here to Nationalism.
The historical precondition of Indian identity was one element of it; so was regional and anti-colonial patriotism.
More recently an alternate viewpoint of ‘purifying exclusivism’ has tended to intrude into and take over the political and cultural landscape.
It necessitates adherence to and affection for the nation in all its rich diversity.
This is what nationalism means, and should mean, in a global community of nations.
The Israeli scholar Yael Tamir has dwelt on this at some length.
In our plural secular democracy, therefore, the ‘other’ is to be none other than the ‘self’.
Jai Hind.
She has written about history and current political developments.
Jai Hind.
I have asked the Secretary General to make available to the Hon’ble Members the statistical data on the work done.
It denies to the Members opportunities to seek accountability of the executive through questions, ‘Zero Hour’ issues, and discussions and debates on issues of public interest and concern.
It reflects adversely on the parliamentary process and our commitment to it.
There is an imperative need to dispel this impression.
Three weeks back, on December 1, the Rajya Sabha solemnly committed itself to the principles and ideals of the Constitution.
A functioning legislature is an essential concomitant of these principles; disruptions amount to their negation.
The Chair appeals to the Hon’ble members: Before we disperse, may I wish you Seasons Greetings and a very Happy New Year.
This is indeed a momentous occasion.
TAPI is much more than a gas pipeline project for our countries.
The launch of TAPI also marks the first step towards fulfilling the vision of an economically integrated region stretching from the Bay of Bengal to the Caspian Sea.
The fact that we are doing so in the historic Silk Road city of Mary (Merv) is entirely appropriate.
It was here that our ideas and imaginations, spirituality and song, art and architecture met and mingled, and a shared history was written.
TAPI reflects our strong desire to put this chapter behind us and stride confidently into the future.
So today, we return to Mary, to write another chapter in our voyage through history.
President Berdimuhamedov,   I fondly recall my visit to Turkmenistan in 2008 and our discussions on India's participation in the gas pipeline project.
I thank you for your untiring leadership and the strength of your commitment towards TAPI.
Your role has been and will be central to the success of TAPI.
I also wish to thank President Ghani and Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif for their active involvement.
Your strong support for TAPI reflects your interest in securing the economic future of the people of Afghanistan and Pakistan respectively.
Your personal commitment to the success of our common venture augurs well for the entire region and for the people of all our countries.
India’s young and dynamic Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Mr Dharmendra Pradhan, who is with us today, represents a new generation of India’s political leadership that is working hard to build a prosperous future for the country.
I am confident that with the active engagement of all four governments, and the support of our international partners, we can overcome such challenges.
We also need to work together to ensure the technical and commercial viability of the project in its broadest sense.
The international marketplace for energy works on complex principles.
Often these are difficult to fathom.
Energy is a strategic commodity for us in our quest to provide a better future to our citizens.
Any uncertainty or disruption in supply will impact not only the prospects of economic growth but also our human development objectives.
I wish to assure you that India will take a constructive and cooperative approach towards addressing issues related to the TAPI project.
We are confident that all issues can be addressed through a spirit of mutual accommodation and sharing of costs and benefits.
Friends,   India’s association with the TAPI project goes back almost a decade.
It began as an Observer country at the 9th Steering Committee Meeting in 2006.
In April 2008, India was formally admitted as a member of the Project.
This was just days after my visit to Turkmenistan and my talks with President Berdimohamedov.
Since then, India has been actively participating in all the meetings and has been an active votary of the project.
Recently, during the visit of Prime Minister Mr. Narendra Modi to Turkmenistan in July 2015, both India and Turkmenistan had reaffirmed strong commitment towards timely implementation of this strategic project for the common benefit of people of the four countries.
Excellencies,   We are here today as partners in a new journey of hope and progress.
We cannot limit our aspirations by the narrow views of a few misguided elements or afford to live in the shadow of global power equations.
TAPI is a manifestation of such an historic opportunity.
I am confident that if we work on the basis of a common vision and shared prosperity, we will be successful in realising a path-breaking project that will be of immense benefit to our future generations.
Thank you.
Distinguished Guests,   Excellencies,   Ladies and gentlemen,  I bring with me the heartiest felicitations and greetings from the government and people of India on the 20th Anniversary of adoption of the status of ‘Permanent Neutrality’ by Turkmenistan.
India was a co-sponsor of the Resolution.
Recently, on June 3, 2015, the UN General Assembly had passed a Resolution to welcome the decision of the Turkmen government to declare 2015 as the ‘Year of Peace and Neutrality’ and to host an international Conference on the theme of Neutrality.
My presence here today is a reaffirmation of India’s continued support to our Turkmen friends.
Excellencies, Ladies and gentlemen,  The formal proclamation of neutral status was a historic event for Turkmenistan.
The founding President of Turkmenistan, Turkmenbashy Saparmurat Niyazov, who in his wisdom and foresight had articulated the conceptual basis of Turkmenistan’s Permanent Neutrality.
It set the stage for Turkmenistan to chart out its path for development and progress on its own terms while respecting the fundamental principles of international peace and cooperation.
In the twenty years since adoption of a neutral status, Turkmenistan has remained committed to building harmonious relations with its neighbours and promote peace and security in the world.
Friends,   The idea of neutrality or its use as a political precept is not unknown to India.
The basic values that underlie the policy of neutrality are of peace, non-violence and peaceful resolution of disputes.
This did not imply a passive role for the Movement in international politics but formulation of positions in an independent manner so as to reflect the interests of its members.
We have- both bilaterally and at international forums- conveyed our appreciation of the positive contribution made by this policy towards providing security, stability, sustainable development and humanitarian assistance in the region as well as the all-round progress of the Turkmenistan.
Mr. President ,  India and Turkmenistan have shared historical links.
The most revered Turkmen poet Magtymguly Pyragy  (Makhtumqoli Faraghi) yearned to visit India, and this love for Indian people is reflected in his poems.
“Here and there,” he wrote “all the ways in Turkmenistan go to my Hindustan”.
This bond has grown stronger in the contemporary times.
During the recent visit of our Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi to Turkmenistan, we reiterated our vision for a shared future.
Today, Turkmenistan lives in peace and harmony with all countries of the region and the world.
Under your sagacious leadership, Turkmenistan has sought to harness its geopolitical, economic and human potential to provide to its people a high quality of life, dynamic economy and peaceful relations with the external world.
We remain committed to supporting our Turkmen friends in this endeavor by deepening our cooperation in strategic, economic, cultural, humanitarian, scientific and educational spheres.
I am confident that under your wise and far-sighted leadership Turkmenistan will continue to gain in strength and confidence and become a key actor in regional affairs.
India wishes the Turkmen people and government further success in their policy of neutrality as we work together to address the challenges of cross-border terrorism, fundamentalism and extremism.
We will be your true partners in your striving for regional and global peace and sustainable development.
Thank you.
For this reason, I am happy to be here today to join others to celebrate the occasion.
The concept of human rights is of ancient vintage.
Until quite recently, however, it was selective rather than universal.
Here lies the uniqueness of the date - December 10 - that we have gathered to commemorate and celebrate.
Its operational mechanisms include the Universal Periodic Review to assess the human rights situations in all Member States and Special Procedures to examine, advise and publicly report on thematic issues or human rights situations in specific countries.
Thus the responsibility of national governments to uphold and implement international human rights standards is not in doubt.
And yet, as T S Eliot wrote-    “Between the idea And the realityBetween the motion And the actFalls the Shadow”  The effort to bridge this gap continues.
While persisting in the effort to attain the desirable, it is somewhat easier to focus on the doable.
I refer here to the human rights commitment and performance of our own country.
II    The framers of our own Constitution were aware of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The Fundamental Rights enshrined in the Constitution cover most of the rights that had been articulated in the Universal Declaration.
Over the years our courts have dwelt on the notion of fundamental rights in the Constitution and have expanded their scope and nature.
It can thus be argued with justice that many of the rights articulated in the Universal Declaration have now been subsumed under the expanded meaning of the Fundamental Rights.
Right to life now includes right to human dignity and quality of life.
Similarly, the Directive Principles of State Policy in Part IV of the Constitution go beyond the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
A mechanism, in the shape of the Protection of The of Human Rights Act, 1993 and the constitution of the National Human Rights Commission, the State Human Rights commissions and Human Rights courts, has been put in place for the enforcement of these rights.
Certain other legislations which may be referred to in the context of human rights, including Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 and Rules, 1977, as well as legislation providing for care and protection of especially vulnerable groups.
Thus the institutional structure for the attainment and enforcement of human rights is firmly in place.
Our quest, today therefore, needs to focus on:        A perusal of reports from Government and non-Government Organizations-both domestic and international- provides an overview of the human rights monitoring and safeguard mechanisms in India.
The number of cases of custodial death in 2011-2012 stood at 1302.
The Human Rights Watch World Report for 20154 criticized India for continuing with state censorship and imposition of certain restrictions on Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs).
It noted that caste-based discrimination, neglect of marginalized communities and violence against women continued.
It expressed concern on what it called ‘the lack of accountability of security forces’ and recommended urgent police reforms to increase capacity and accountability.
It also expressed concern at the continuation of the Armed Forces special Powers act in several parts of India.
The report commended India for continuing to accept refugees from Tibet, Mayanmar and Afghanistan while noting that India had not ratified the UN Refugee conventions.
It expressed concern on the human right abuses by armed insurgent/terrorist groups, which killed and injured civilians and destroyed property.
III  Many of the shortcomings mentioned in these reports have also figured in periodic reports of some national NGOs, in the media and in Parliament.
Many new issues have become part of the human rights agenda and will remain crucial in the coming decades.
The conflict over natural resources, the issue of gender equality and the increasing incidence of gender violence and of caste, communal, ethnic and sub-national conflicts among communities, and environmental implications of some developmental projects, are some examples.
Faced with these candid assessments, how should we, as a society, react to them?
Our point of reference should be the Constitution of India and the principles, rights and duties enunciated therein.
On this basis, we are duty bound, legally and morally, to address these challenges through firm and unbiased corrective actions by the state, civil society and other stakeholders.
It is, and should be viewed as, a societal duty.
It is here that education in human rights culture becomes critically important in educational institutions.
Citizens and civil society institutions must therefore take a lead in helping us meet the moral challenges of our times.
We as a nation have to awaken our collective conscience.
This volume is a bit of both; a narration and a commentary on some events of the recent past and some contemporary happenings.
It is thematic and interesting, partly personal, partly story telling, partly an expose.
Its seven themes cover critical areas of our national life and have a continuing relevance.
To millions of watchers of television news, Ms. Dutt has often been the face of the news.
Some of the dates – 1984, 1992-1993, 1999, 2001, 2002, 2007, 2008 – are etched in public memory.
The author comments on the trend of our political discourse today.
She opines that parliamentary democracy has slipped into ‘audience democracy’ through television studios and different manifestations of the social media.
Last week, Mr. Ramchandra Guha had written about our democracy being reduced to its electoral aspect only.
The pitfalls of both are evident; both manifest a propensity for symbolism, grand standing and shortcuts.
Both undermine the constitutional intent of scrutiny of legislation, of meaningful accountability and discussion on issues of public concern.
These temptations should, must, be eschewed.
There would always be different interpretations of contemporary events.
I congratulate her for writing this book.
Jai Hind
Some friends were persuasive enough to cajole me to agree to be here to inaugurate the Times Lit Fest Delhi.
It aspires to be the bridge between the ivory tower and the town square.
This description of the target area is perplexing.
It defuses the focus and hampers its delineation.
On the other hand, it widens the choice.
The latter, in our times, is the preferred option.
It thus serves a societal purpose.
A well-developed literary tradition is the hallmark of every civilization.
We are immensely fortunate in this regard in India, having not only one of the oldest but also an unmatched diversity of literary traditions in a multitude of languages and cultural patterns.
This is reflective of our plural ethos that has accommodated and enriched a wide variety of impulses and influences.
The sense of unity which pervades the fabric of Indian society is intangible.
It is reflective of a continuum from the traditional to modern and post-modern in prose, poetry and the multiplicity of oral narratives.
The writers and narrators present here - both the illustrious and those struggling to get published - are thus the inheritors of a very old, rich and multi-faceted tradition.
Their role in inducing sanity in an increasingly maddening world would remain critical.
I felicitate the organizers of this Lit Fest and wish them, and the participants, success in their endeavour ‘to bring forth the fruits of the Spirit.’   Jai Hind.
I thank you for your invitation to be here today to address the Centre’s 3rd conference on Social Innovation.
Our theme today is social innovation, not mere innovation that may rightly be in the realm of technology and focus on making manufacturing more efficient and or developing new products and services for the consumer.
Our vision, instead, is wider and emanates from a desire to address the gaps in the developmental chain.
It can best be defined as “new Solutions to social challenges that have the intent and effect of equality, justice and empowerment”.
In other words, It should thus cover technological, institutional, cultural, educational and social innovations.
This is all the more relevant as the country has embarked on a decade of innovation to reflect the best of what an aspiring generation needs.
Consequently, it must be socially useful and must not be destructive or disruptive of social cohesion.
Thus social innovation is inseparable from the cultural, ecological, economic, political and spiritual environment in which it takes place.
Equality, equity, empowerment and social justice constitute the fundamental values of just and democratic societies.
While economic progress is essential for survival and well being, it is neither a substitute nor the panacea for the social challenges that confront us.
Every society, including ours, requires its constituent parts to work in harmony.
This principle, universal in nature, was expressed succinctly some years back by the former UN Secretary General Kofi Annan.
We must recognize, he said, “that stable societies are built on three pillars.
This transition from tolerance to acceptance, in actual day to day practice rather than as a mantra in political discourse, is critical for making a society fully inclusive rather than selectively so.
India has a long tradition of innovation and since Independence there have been a series of empowering social innovations in India.
The innovation to use buffalo milk in place of cow’s milk to produce milk powder laid the foundation for the Anand cooperative dairy model- ushering in the white revolution in India.
The introduction of cooked mid-day meals in schools was an innovation that has had a multilayered impact on the society.
The Aravind Eye Care Hospital provides a vivid illustration.
The honest truth is that we lag behind many others, including our peers.
The Global Innovation Index 20154 ranks us as 81st out of 141 countries, below Brazil at 70, South Africa at 60, Russia at 48 and China at 29.
The Index identified three areas of weakness: SMEs, intellectual property rights, and higher education.
He said “The world is changing quicker than ever before and we cannot remain oblivious to that.
The President of India declared the year 2010 to be the start of the Decade of Innovation with a specific focus on addressing issues of poverty.
To further this national agenda, and administer governmental activity in support of innovation through assistance in human, financial, social and intellectual capital, the National Innovation Council was created to develop a ‘National Roadmap for Innovation’ over the next decade.
Alongside, a National Innovation Foundation – India, was set up as an autonomous body of the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India.
Increasing the scalability of grass-root innovations necessitates a strong linkage between the invaluable knowledge bank prevalent in our society and the formal education system.
I wish you success in your deliberation.
Jai Hind.
Bali leaves an indelible impression on the mind.
Its natural beauty and serenity is evident; so is the warmth and friendship for India and Indians displayed by its people.
The amity is perhaps natural given our centuries-old ties of religion and culture.
II  Indonesian islands were known to Indians since ancient times as 'Suvarnadvipa' or 'Suvarnabhumi', as the Land of Gold, as referred to in the Jatakas and in the Ramayana epic.
Even today, our citizens in the State of Odisha – one of whom is a distinguished member of my delegation - celebrate a festival called 'Bali Yatra' commemorating the day when ancient Oriya mariners and traders sailed to Bali, Sumatra, Java and Borneo.
The ancient Nalanda University hosted several Indonesian scholars studying Buddhist philosophy.
A Nalanda inscription records that King Devapala of Pala Empire build a monastery for Indonesian students and granted villages on behalf of Maharaja Balaputradeva of Suvarnadwipa.
It was traders from India that brought the cultural traits and religious practices as also the Sanskrit language.
This common heritage of Hinduism and Buddhism is abundantly evident in the Balinese philosophy of Siva-Buddha.
In our own times, Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore said after visiting Bali and Java in 1927 that "I see India everywhere", I too have the same feeling after my short visit to this island of Gods.
Yet the cultural stream here in Bali, Indonesia, is truly distinct and unique.
The cultural spark may have come from the Indic cultural hearth, but it was shaped and moulded here and its expression is the work of local Indonesian genius.
III  Our appreciation of the past determines how we shape our future.
A shared heritage, not only reminds us of our past cultural links, but also nurtures our present interactions and promotes economic linkage between our two countries.
Our relationship was re-invigorated in 2005 when our two countries signed a Strategic Partnership Agreement, which provides us with a strong base upon which a towering edifice of friendship can be built.
There have been regular political exchanges between India and Indonesia.
My visit to Indonesia is another link in the chain to foster deeper and closer political, economic and people to people relations.
As two vibrant and growing democracies, we share similar challenges and have similar opportunities of growth.
Our shared socio-economic agenda calls for intensive cooperation and consultation for economic development and social empowerment of our people.
Our cooperation is for mutual benefits and is guided by the requirements and priorities of the people and Government of Indonesia.
Education will be the key to the success of our people in the 21st century.
In India and Indonesia we have several world class institutions and universities.
There is a need to have regular exchanges of teachers, scholars and students between our academic and research institutions.
We would be happy to share our expertise in different sectors with the faculty and officials of your University under the spirit of South-South cooperation.
We would also be keen to host your Faculty for post-doctoral research in India on subjects of mutual interest and benefit.
We have a partnership with Indonesia for several training and educational programmes as well as for capacity building.
I am happy to learn that a large number of Indonesians, including from the Province of Bali, have benefitted from these.
We look forward to hosting more Balinese officials and students under these programmes in India.
I am told that the number of Indian arrivals to Indonesia has been consistently growing.
With cooperation between the tourism stakeholders in both countries, the bilateral tourism flow is poised to grow substantially.
We also look forward to welcoming more 'Tirtha Yatris' from Bali, Java and other islands in Indonesia.
Like your country, India too has several magnificent destinations for the pilgrims and tourists seeking spiritual solace or a communion with nature.
As two fastest growing economies in the world, the potential of our joint efforts to enhance our bilateral trade and investment, our collaboration in science and technology, our cooperation in human resource development and, of course, our cultural exchanges, is boundless.
As India embarks on the new phase of its Act East Policy, and as Indonesia prepares for successfully integrating economically in to the ASEAN Community, we hope to work with our Indonesian partners to realize this potential.
IV  Being ancient civilizations, we also share the philosophy of peace, universal brotherhood, compassion, tolerance and non-violence.
These values also guided our great leader Mahatma Gandhi.
The Gandhian approach has in it a reflection of the core Balinese principles of respect and non-violence.
I am delighted that the University of Udayana decided to install the bust of Gandhiji in this campus, which I had the privilege to unveil just before this event.
Gandhiji is not unknown to this island.
Ibu Ni Wayan Gedong Oka, a Balinese and one of your faculty members, was a committed Gandhian, who practiced and promoted Gandhian philosophy and had also set up Gandhi Ashrams in Bali and Java.
Your University hosts an 'India Corner' in its Library in this campus and has books that help students and scholars discover the Indian authors on a variety of subjects.
Nor are modern art forms neglected.
I am informed that Indian cinema is becoming increasingly popular in Indonesia and is helping connect the young people of Indonesia to modern India.
The 'Festival of India in Indonesia' conducted earlier this year with the theme 'Sahabat India' or Friendship with India celebrated our historic cultural ties highlighting the commonalities in literature, dance-dramas, folk art, music, cuisine, yoga and fashion.
The Festival showcased the unity of diversity - ‘Bhineka Tunggal Ika’- of both our nations.
I thank the Government of Indonesia and the Balinese Administration for their strong support to making the festival a success.
I thank you for inviting me today.
Long live our friendship for the benefit our two people!
The overall engagement between India and Indonesia remains vibrant and full of vitality.
Economic and commercial cooperation occupies prominent position in our bilateral matrix.
In my meetings with the Indonesian leadership, I found a strong desire to expand our commercial engagement.
The market liberalization of India in the nineties followed by calibrated economic reforms in the past decade has led to sustainable economic growth and socio-economic development.
India's economy registered a growth of 7% in the last quarter which is one of the highest rates globally.
The last two decades of economic growth have also strengthened India’s private sector and it is keen to expand its global operations.
The innovative spirit of Indian industry, backed by a strong government research and development push and a network of quality education institutions, make India and the Indian companies the most promising business partners today.
Realizing the need for enhancing the economic and strategic cooperation with countries in Southeast Asia, India launched the 'Look East Policy' in 1991.
Last year, the Prime Minister of India envisaged a more proactive 'Act East Policy' aimed at rapidly scaling up our cooperation with ASEAN member countries in crucial areas.
The large economy, an improving investment climate, a young and technically trained work force, and abundant natural resources make Indonesia a natural partner for India.
I understand that Indonesia has also unveiled a series of economic reform policies involving major deregulation measures aimed at reviving economic growth.
I am sure that these measures with create further opportunities for collaboration between Indian and Indonesian businesses.
Excellencies,While India and Indonesia share cordial political relations, the bilateral trade and investments have not realized its full potential.
India is the largest buyer of crude palm oil from Indonesia and also imports coal, minerals, rubber, pulp and hydrocarbon in significant quantities.
India exports refined petroleum products, maize, commercial vehicles, telecommunication equipment, oil seeds to Indonesia.
There is a need to balance our bilateral trade as India's import from Indonesia was US$ 15 billion against an export of US$ 4 billion in 2014-15.
For us, Indonesia is not just a trading destination but a more significant long-term strategic partner.
We have a shared vision for building a peaceful regional order and co-operate on a number of important security issues, including anti-terrorism and maritime security.
As such, we need to synergize our efforts in the areas of economy and business.
The vast consumer market, youthful and skilled human resources and expertise in the field of information technology of India coupled with Indonesia's natural resources, youthful population and strategic location would provide a platform for enhanced economic engagement.
As both India and Indonesia make an attempt to broad base their economy, they should harness the complementarities in attracting investments which is a key factor for a positive economic growth.
Infrastructure development and energy security are key areas for cooperation for emerging economies like India and Indonesia.
These sectors allow for both our countries to collaborate and benefit from each other's expertise.
Our societies are still largely agrarian.
To fulfill the energy requirements, we have set an ambitious target of installing 175 GW of renewable capacity by 2022.
This needs an investment of US$ 120 billion.
The signing of the MOU on Renewable Energy Cooperation yesterday reaffirms the commitment of India and Indonesia in working towards alternative sources of energy.
I urge the Indonesian companies to explore these opportunities of investing in infrastructure and manufacturing sector in India particularly in downstream manufacturing sectors like coal, palm oil and rubber which are exported to India in large volumes.
Excellencies, Given the growing trade and commerce between our countries, maritime security becomes a significant area of cooperation.
Developing capacities for ensuring better costal security and disaster response management are other key areas where India and Indonesia can cooperate.
Enhancing the economic partnership and increasing bilateral trade and investment is a shared responsibility of both the governments and the business communities.
Our existing bilateral mechanisms of Energy Forum, Biennial Trade Ministers Forum, High-Level Task Force and CEOs Forum provide a strong platform to enhance our business engagement.
Trade links between India and Indonesia can be traced back to 2nd century B.C.
The ancient trade had led to great prosperity in the region.
We need to work together to reclaim that legacy.
I see a prosperous and peaceful future as our commercial interactions deepen.
It will open a new era of peace and prosperity, not only for our two countries but the entire region.
I wish you success in your deliberations.
Thank you
This is a special occasion, by virtue of its subject, its theme, and its venue.
The two books released here relate to Prime Minister Narendra Modi ji.
Both have been commented upon by previous speakers.
To do so effectively, they need verbal skills.
Success often depends on the occasion, the nature of the audience, and the right mix of facts, logic and sentiments to exude a sense of authenticity.
History abounds in instances of leaders moving crowds with the power of words.
Semantics differentiates between an orator and a demagogue; both speak to persuade; both play on emotions.
The difference is often subjective and depends on the trust reposed by of the audience.
The two books before us capture important facets of an important personality of our times.
Given its sophisticated, multi-level dissemination and its large potential audience, Mann Ki Baat is an ingenious and influential communication platform created by PM Modi.
It takes a traditional medium like the radio and marries it to the entire spectrum of communication technologies available — from television to the internet, from social media to mobile telephony.
A new complementary ‘Jan ki Baat’ programme has recently been announced and would make the process increasingly interactive.
I congratulate the authors and publishers for their efforts in compiling these volumes.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be here in Raipur to address today’s convocation.
To this end, we adopted the Constitution of India as the fundamental law of the land to guide us in all matters of legislative, executive and judicial action.
The Constitution, and the judicial structure emanating from it, is premised on the concept of the Rule of Law.
The term itself has deep roots in history but in its modern form was specifically enunciated in late 19th century by the British jurist Albert Dicey.
To him, the essential ingredients of rule of law were, (a) the absolute supremacy of regular law , (b) equality before the law, and (c) access to justice and development of law by the judges on a case by case basis.
This further safeguarded by the judicial power discharging its functions independently of the legislature and the executive.
Thus, the essence is that all authority is subject to and constrained by law.4 Over time and in different societies, these principles have been challenged, amplified and modified.
Upendra Baxi has sought to read the rule of law as going beyond a mere division of functions in modes of governance.
III The Constitution of India embodies the modern concept of rule of law with the establishment of a judicial system, which should be able to work impartially and free from all influences.
Its section on Fundamental Rights elucidates this in some detail.
In the case of Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab8, the Court emphasized that rule of law excludes arbitrariness and unreasonableness.
The procedure must be “right, just and fair” and not “arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive”.
It should conform to the principles of “natural justice”.
IV The constitutional and juridical framework is thus impeccable, but it is relevant here to raise a question about the extent to which we as a polity are implementing these principles and procedures in actual practice?
Another reason is the increasing complexity of modern governance and the resultant need for greater professionalism in legislative work.
This is evident in the functioning of the civil service and particularly of the police.
This is particularly true of its good work in expanding the ambit of rights.
One law officer has also expressed concern over the ‘increasing disregard of the salutary doctrine of precedents’.
Another area of concern is the excessive zeal reflected at times in pronouncements of members of the judiciary.
Some observers have asserted that ‘the Supreme Court has given up any formal pretence to the doctrine of the separation of powers’.
This is perceived to upset, as a former Speaker of the Lok Sabha observed, ‘the fine constitutional balance and the democratic functioning of the state as a whole’.
1, Thomson Reuters, 1995, p. 114.
‘A Rule of Law Culture’ in The Indian Express, September 22, 2015
Mercifully, the doubt is dispelled on closer reading!
I propose today to speak about some aspects of the security scenario since it provides an overarching perspective to all political, economic and social activities.
The context is relevant.
The Persian Gulf is a body of water 989 kilometers in length and 55 km in width at its narrowest point.
Thus peace, stability and security in the area are critical to global security and prosperity.
This establishes a convergence of local, regional and global interests.
Census statistics tells us that India has a youthful population, with over half the Indians being below the age of 35.
In India, as per the 2011 census, the population of senior citizens who are more than 60 years old, was 10.4 crore, which is 8.6 percent of the population.
But in India, the problem is compounded by two issues.
One, the Indian society is undergoing rapid transformation under the impact of industrialization, urbanization and globalization.
As nuclear families become the norm, the family based social safety nets are no longer adequate.
Finances are stretched as healthcare becomes expensive.
The second issue is that nearly 90 percent of the elderly have worked in the informal sector and do not receive any postâ€“retirement social security coverage, like pensions and medical assistance.
The impact and reach of public social security infrastructure has remained limited and a large number of elderly have failed to benefit from the government schemes.
On the Global AgeWatch Index (GAWI) for 2014, India ranks 71st among the 96 countries2 .
This when countries like Bolivia and Sri Lanka, which also have high poverty levels, rank much above India.
III The Government of India is duty bound to provide reliable, effective and easy to access care and assistance to the elderly.
Well-being of older persons has been mandated in the Constitution of India.
Social security has been made the concurrent responsibility of the Central and State Governments.
Maintenance of Parents is included in section 125 of Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 and also the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act 1956.
The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and senior Citizen Act, 2007, also known as "Senior Citizens Act" explicitly states that it should be the duty of the children to maintain their parents.
The Act applies to all communities.
The elderly in India face a range of challenges that include failing health, economic insecurity, isolation, lowered self-esteem, abuse, idleness and neglect.
These specific set of problems require specialized response.
Very few Government hospitals in India have specialized geriatrics facilities.
Even in the absence of a well-endowed economy, strong political will can do the job.
For example Bolivia, a country with resource constraints, ranks much higher than India in the global index for elderly care.
The achievement can be linked to the government's progressive policy for the elderly.
In 2009, the Bolivian government rewrote the Constitution to include and guarantee the rights of elderly, who account for 10.4 percent of the country's population.
The received wisdom is that a larger proportion of old people means slower growth and less savings.
In some developed countries, the earlier views on retirement have undergone a change.
Almost 20% of Americans aged over 65 are now in the labour force, compared with 13% in 2000.
Less-skilled workers often have manual jobs that get harder with age.
Training the elderly, providing quality health care and modifying the work environment helps in increasing the productivity term of the seniors.
An experiment by leading German carmaker, BMW at its plant in Dingolfing, as described in a 2010 Harvard Business Review article, threw up some interesting results.
The total investment in modifications was a paltry US $ 50,000.
The changes led to an enhancement of productivity by 7%.
Education, training and information needs of older persons will also have to be met.
I once again thank the organizers, HelpAge India for inviting me to this event and wish them all the very best in their future endeavors.
Jai Hind.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I am delighted to be part of the programs to commemorate World Heart Day.
The World Heart Day, since 2000, has become a landmark event to inform and educate the people around the world about health risks related to the human heart.
I applaud these efforts to educate the people on the problems and causes of heart disease and to work together with¨C our doctors, scientists, teachers, businessmen, parents and children ¨C to promote healthy lifestyles and ensure a healthier future for our people.
II India has seen a rapid transition in its heart disease burden over the past couple of decades.
The load of communicable and non©\communicable diseases is projected to get reversed in 2020.
A conservative estimate indicates that there could be more than 30 million heart patients in India, of which about 14 million are in urban and 16 million in rural areas.
If the current trend continues by the year 2020, the burden of atherothrombotic cardiovascular diseases in India will surpass other regions of the world.
The growth of heart diseases is dependent on a number of interlinked factors such as aging, changing lifestyles and food habits.
Rapidly evolving socioeconomic determinants like access to healthcare, environmental stress and income levels also impact cardiovascular diseases risk factors.
However, the growth of heart diseases affects not just the urban and economically well©\off but also the under privileged.
The Indian rural population and urban poor are facing a "double burden" ¨C with incidences of acute diseases continuing, while there is a rapid growth in incidences of chronic diseases.
The key challenges being faced in cardiac care in India are low availability of facilities, lack of accessibility, and limited affordability of effective and efficient treatment, coupled with lack of awareness towards non-communicable diseases including cardiovascular diseases.
In response to ever-rising burden of cardiovascular diseases, the Government has initiated an integrated National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancers, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS).
The aim of the program is prevention and control of common non-communicable disease risk factors through an integrated approach and reduction of premature morbidity and mortality.
The programme has led to some capacity building of health systems and improvement in quality of care; large gaps however still exists and there is extreme pressure on the limited resources available.
The Public Health Foundation of India in collaboration with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has also started programmes to advance consciousness of disease prevention measures.
These include early detection, healthy lifestyle and diet, physical activity, yoga and stress management.
The Parliament in 2003 passed the Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products Act to further the cause of prevention of cardiovascular diseases.
There has been a steady annual rise to the tune of 25©\30 percent per year in the number of coronary interventions over the past several years.
This suggests that the disease is now achieving epidemic proportions; it also shows that the accessibility of the population to advanced cardiac facilities is increasing.
We would need a comprehensive approach to combating heart disease, with a focus on education and access to proper health facilities.
For this both the public and the private sectors have to work together.
I commend the organizers for taking this initiative.
I wish them success in this endeavor.
Jai Hind.
I deem it a privilege to be invited to deliver the First Ram Manohar Lohia Lecture.
I am also happy for this opportunity to visit the campus of the ITM University, Gwalior and to interact in some measure with the academic community present here.
No single adjective, or set of adjectives, can adequately describe Ram Manohar Lohia.
For over two decades he was the 'stormy petrel' of Indian politics.
He was erudite and had a passionate interest in all matters relating to human freedom, justice and dignity.
He earned recognition of his knowledge of law from none other than the British magistrate trying him for preaching against the war effort in 1939.
Earlier, in November 1936, he joined Jawaharlal Nehru when the latter founded the Indian Civil Liberties Union (ICLU) with Rabindranath Tagore as its president.
The concept of civil liberties, Lohia said on that occasion, "defines state authority within clear limits.
The task of the State is to protect these liberties.
But States usually do not like the task and act contrarily.
Lohia was a socialist and an avowed anti-communist.
He had pronounced views on the caste system and the damage it has done to Indian psyche.
These were candidly, albeit brutally, expressed in another monograph, The Caste System.
Certain castes have become especially gifted.
"Thus for	instance the Marwari Bania is on top with regard to industry and	finance and the Saraswat Brahmin in respect of intellectual pursuits."
"It is absurd to talk about competing with these castes unless others	are given preferential opportunities and privileges."
"I must here make	distinction between opportunities for employment and those for	education."
In his speeches in the area, he incited cultivators not to pay "the enhanced irrigation rates" to Government.
He was severely critical of the state Government.
He was arrested and charged under Section 3 of the U. P. Special Powers Act, 14 of 1932.
In a habeas corpus petition in the High Court, he contended that the Act, and particularly Section 3 of it, stood repealed under Article 13 of the Constitution on account of its being inconsistent with the provisions of Article 19.
He was elected to the Lok Sabha in August 1963 and a few days later delivered a sharply focused speech in an adjournment motion expressing dissatisfaction with the government's policies and postures.
The servant has to behave modestly and politely with his master."
He utilized the parliamentary platform to express powerfully his views on what he considered were shortfalls in domestic and foreign policy issues.
Time and experience will tell if Lohia would have urged a greater measure of flexibility in the strategies of affirmative action currently underway.
My purpose this afternoon is to focus on the principle of dissent in democracy that Dr. Lohia personified and its relevance for the continuing success of functioning democracies anywhere in the world.
II In 1950 the People of India gave themselves a Constitution that promised to secure to all citizens, inter alia, "liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship."
The Constitution was not crafted in a vacuum.
These were formally encapsulated in the Objectives Resolution of January 22, 1947.
In his speech at the end of the drafting process in the Constituent Assembly, Ambedkar had warned about the impending "life of contradictions."
Ambedkar spoke of the danger posed to political democracy by disconnect between political equality and socio-economic inequality.
A few decades later two eminent sociologists commented on some of its underlying aspects.
The noted the backdrop of two competing narratives: "the civilisational history of co-survival of communities and the political history of ethnic competition and conflicts."
"11 The quest for correctives often found expression through assertions relating to freedom of expression and its concomitant, the concept of dissent.
It is concept that contains within it the democratic right to object, oppose, protest and even resist.
Cumulatively it can be defined as the unwillingness in an individual or group to cooperate with an established authority â€“ social, cultural or governmental.
III Despite the unambiguously stated position in law, civil society concerns about constraints on the right of dissent in actual practice have been articulated powerfully.
"On the surface," wrote one of our eminent academics some time back, "Indian democracy has a cacophony of voices.
Informed commentaries suggest the contrary.
Herein lies the indispensability of dissent.
Jai Hind.
A few months ago, in a foreword to another book on Myanmar, I had lamented the lack of serious scholarship on the country despite its obvious importance for India.
India's interests in Myanmar arise from a shared cultural heritage and a shared colonial past, as also a long land and maritime boundary.
The proximity to our North-Eastern region and the geographical location of Myanmar as our conduit to the South-East Asia makes it important from our point of view.
We also have shared security interests, and hence our desire to see a stable Myanmar that is at peace with itself.
Myanmar is blessed with mineral and hydro-carbon deposits and it can be source of energy and other minerals for India.
But this is not a one way street.
India offers a large and growing proximate market to Myanmar, especially for its agricultural produce.
India can also be a source for technology, industrial expertise, infrastructure and investments.
Indeed, we have been collaborating with Myanmar to better train and equip its human capital, and there is certainly room to enhance our cooperation in this sector.
India and Myanmar can collaborate on security and defense matters and as Myanmar prepares for its tryst with democracy, India offers a ready model for a diverse and democratic society.
We need to be sensitive to how the people and elite of Myanmar perceive India and appreciate their interests as well.
Ambassador Rajiv Bhatia is uniquely equipped to write this book.
I congratulate Ambassador Bhatia, as well as the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies (ISEAS), Singapore and the publishers - Routledge India- for bringing out this volume.
I am sure it will serve to be a useful reference volume for students, policy makers and the public at large.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be here today at this event to mark the 60th anniversary of the Springdales School.
The school is also blessed with a dedicated and competent faculty, led by its principals Dr. Jyoti Bose and Ms. Ameeta Wattal.
I understand that the commemoration celebrations are being marked by a conference whose topic is: ‘In search of a Humane Society – The role of education’.
This takes us to the very core of social existence.
Down the ages, every society has given itself a set of core values on the basis of which it delineates its social, educational, economic and political agenda.
There have, of course, been general statements of principles in all ages.
In ancient India, the focus on learning of a very high order was premised on exclusivity and the exclusion of some.
In ancient Greece, Plato’s threefold formula – gymnastics for the body, mathematics for the mind and music for the soul – was widely acclaimed but on the fundamental premises of a slave society.
The same pattern can be discerned in other societies.
If each is implemented in practice, in latter and spirit, the foundations of a humane society would be laid.
I once again congratulate the entire Springdales school family on their 60th Anniversary and wish the management, the faculty, staff students and parents, all the very best for the future.
Jai Hind.
Excellency Mr. Sok An, Deputy Prime Minister of Kingdom of Cambodia, Ladies and gentlemen, It is a privilege to be here with a distinguished gathering of leaders, scholars, and officials.
Perhaps such amity and warmth is natural given our cultural linkages.
We share the common heritage of Buddhism and the philosophy of compassion, tolerance and non-violence.
Our shared legacy is reflected in the religious and cultural ties that bind us.
Hinduism and Buddhism spread out across Asia from India.
The structures at Angkor Wat, Angkor Thom, Bayon and other historical sites bear testimony to the flourishing exchanges and cultural synthesis between our peoples.
The waters of sister rivers - Ganga and Mekong - sustain our cultures.
Our exchanges and cultural flows were disrupted in the period of colonialism.
After India won her independence in 1947, we have made a conscious effort to re-engage with our brothers and sisters in South East Asia.
We have a similar world view.
Our shared socio-economic compulsions make for a strong case of cooperation- particularly in the economic development of each other.
The Cambodia I see today has transformed itself in the last two decades.
Emerging from a period of strife and disturbance, the Cambodian nation today is stable and peaceful with a growing economy and is playing its rightful role in the region.
This is an inspiring story.
The desire and efforts of the Government of Cambodia to continue on the path of economic progress and work towards social uplift of its peoples is deeply appreciated in India.
We, in India, also have similar objectives.
Our cooperation is for mutual benefits and is guided by the requirements and priorities of the people and Government of Cambodia.
As countries where agriculture plays an important role in the national life, we understand the need for harnessing and utilization of the abundant water resources that your country is blessed with.
Development of water resources is a mutually identified area of cooperation and in future also we would continue working with the Cambodian Government in this area.
Cambodia, like India, has a young population.
In order to address the aspirations of our youth, we have embarked upon a strong skill development programme in India.
We have a partnership with Cambodia for capacity building, as well as several training and educational programmes.
I am very happy to learn that a large number of Cambodians have benefitted from these.
The Entrepreneurship Development Center established in Phnom Penh with Indian assistance has been contributing fruitfully to this end.
We would look forward to strengthening and augmenting the facilities there.
We have also enhanced our cooperation with Cambodia under the Mekong-Ganga Cooperation Initiative.
I am informed that the Asian Traditional Textiles Museum in Siem Reap which showcases our collective cultural heritage has been successfully built with Indian assistance.
In my meeting today with Prime Minister Hun Sen, I have conveyed the decision of Government of India to support several projects under Mekong Ganga Cooperation programme targeting the health sector, agriculture and women's empowerment.
We hope that these projects would benefit local communities, and contribute to improvement of public welfare.
The temples at Angkor are a reflection of our shared cultural heritage.
We are very proud of our association in the restoration of historical heritage of Angkor Wat temple complex as well as other sites.
We have recently completed major restoration project at Ta Prohm temples and look forward to starting a new phase of restoration there soon.
Given our close cultural ties and civilizational links, we see a strong potential for tourism to develop between our two countries.
Happily, we have been able to sign this morning a Memorandum of Understanding to enhance tourism.
I am hopeful that this will boost tourist exchanges.
Our shared world view is reflected in our close cooperation on regional and international issues.
We in India value greatly the support that Cambodia has extended to us in the ASEAN-India context.
It was for us a matter of pride that Cambodia in 2002 hosted the first India-ASEAN Summit.
We greatly appreciate Cambodia's support to our initiatives including our efforts to reform the UN, make it more representative and secure for India the permanent membership of the Security Council.
Since 1991, India has assiduously followed a Look East policy.
This policy emanates from a realization that our economic progress and well being is intimately linked to the growth and prosperity of the entire Asian continent, especially of our friends across the Bay of Bengal and Andaman Sea.
In recent months we have enhanced our engagement in the East.
A rapidly developing India and ASEAN can be great partners for each other.
The current economic relationship between India and ASEAN countries presents a multitude of industrial, commercial, and investment opportunities.
India has welcomed ASEAN’s plans to establish economic and political relationships with neighboring nations, and India and ASEAN have increasingly supported bilateral trade, promoted foreign investment, and strengthened diplomatic relations.
This creates strong complementary interests between India and the countries in the region on the basis of a tripod: Commerce, Culture and Connectivity.
These are sustained by more frequent political exchanges.
The India – ASEAN relations are thus poised to scale new heights.
My visit to Cambodia underscores the importance India attaches to Cambodia as part of our increasing engagement with the region.
Geographically, Cambodia lies at the heart of ASEAN.
For us in India, our relationship with Cambodia is a key element of our engagement with ASEAN.
We look forward to Cambodia’s strong support in building bridges and deepening of our relationship with the entire region.
We need to delineate more precisely the contours of our relationship in the coming years.
Our glorious past and shared cultural ties create a strong platform for cooperation in the future.
Despite extremely cordial political relations the diverse areas of cooperation, our bilateral trade and investments remains much below its potential.
Cambodia has maintained a growth of 7% in the last few years.
Your Government is also undertaking policies to further attract investments and broad base the economy.
The recent launch of the new Industrial Policy is a step in that direction.
In India too the economy is back on an upward trajectory and we hope to maintain good economic growth in the foreseeable future.
These trends provide us a very good basis to strengthen our economic ties.
Government of India has made clear its intention to partner Cambodia in its economic development.
As part of our initiatives, the Government has recently set-up a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) to attract Indian investments into Cambodia and other CLMV countries.
We hope to launch this new initiative soon and I am confident that in the near future more Indian companies will explore the investment opportunities here.
There is good scope for sharing experiences for mutual benefit between our two countries.
Agriculture and agro processing sector, mining, oil and gas and small and medium enterprises offers opportunities for trade and investment by Indian business houses and it will be our endeavor to encourage our companies and businesses to explore the emerging opportunities in these areas.
For this, we look forward to support not only from Government of Cambodia but businesses here.
Another area is defence cooperation.
India is happy to have been involved in training efforts for the Cambodian defence forces.
We will continue and enhance these training efforts.
The spreading tide of extremism and terrorism is a threat we both face.
Successfully dealing with such threats requires strong cooperation among like-minded partners.
I am glad that we have taken some steps to institutionalize cooperation in this area.
We will continue to pursue more regular exchanges between our security personnel.
It is a privilege to be invited to address the 50th anniversary session of the All India Majlis-e-Mushawarat.
Needless to say, and like many other compatriots, I have over the years followed in some measure the work of this consultative body.
The Mushawarat was formed in response to a perceived need to defend and protect the identity and dignity of the Muslim community in India in terms of the rights bestowed by the Constitution of India on the citizens of this land.
The Muslims of India constitute a community of 180 million, amounting to a little over 14 percent of the population of the country.
They are, after Indonesia, the second largest national grouping of followers of Islam in the world.
Their contribution to the civilisation and culture of Islam is in no need of commentary.
The Independence of India in August 1947, and the events preceding and following it, cast a shadow of physical and psychological insecurity on Indian Muslims.
They were made to carry, unfairly, the burden of political events and compromises that resulted in the Partition.
They have hesitatingly sought to tend to their wounds, face the challenges and seek to develop response patterns.
Success has been achieved in some measure; much more, however, needs to be done.
In the past decade, work has also been done to delineate the contours of the problem.
The Sachar Committee Report of 2006 did this officially.
The shortcomings in regard to each have been analysed threadbare.
The challenge before us today is to develop strategies and methodologies to address them.
Programmes have been made in abundance; the need of the hour is their implementation.
II The foregoing pertains principally to governmental action or lack thereof.
The imagery of Mahmood and Ayaz standing shoulder to shoulder in the same line is confined to the mosque; so are the injunctions on punctuality, cleanliness and discipline.
Each of these is violated beyond the confines of the congregational prayer.
Available data makes it clear that a high percentage of Muslims falls into these two broad categories.
It is evident that significant sections of the community remain trapped in a vicious circle and in a culturally defensive posture that hinders self advancement.
Tradition is made sacrosanct but the rationale of tradition is all but forgotten.
Jadeediyat or modernity has become a tainted expression.
Such a mindset constrains critical thinking necessary both for the affirmation of faith and for the wellbeing of the community.
Both provide ample theoretical space for focused thinking on social change without impinging on the fundamentals of faith.
It is here that the role of Mushawarat becomes critical.
This effort has to be made in the context of Indian conditions and the uniqueness of its three dimensions: plural, secular and democratic.
But agitation against discrimination can arouse the very emotions that foster discrimination.
The failure to communicate with the wider community in sufficient measure has tended to freeze the boundaries of diversities that characterise Indian society.
Efforts may be made to isolate the community; such an approach should be resisted.
The Indian experience of a large Muslim minority living in secular polity, however imperfect, could even be a model for others to emulate.
One last word.
The Director General has requested me to inaugurate a conference on a subject about which I know next to nothing.
I am nevertheless grateful to him for inviting me today.
A department of works, anywhere and in any period of history, has  been an essential part of governance systems.
The Central Public Works Department, or the CPWD, as the principal Public Works Organisation of the Government of India has had a long and interesting history since its inception in July 1854 as the Ajmer Central Division for colonial works.
The city of New Delhi, as we see it, as well as the buildings in Imperial Shimla and other prestigious buildings like Mayo College Ajmer, can largely be credited to the works of CPWD.
This has been true, with greater intensity and diversity, of the period after Independence.
The CPWD today is a multifaceted infrastructure construction and maintenance Agency with some of the best construction engineering, architectural and horticultural capabilities.
It is the main agency entrusted with the largest, most prestigious and most difficult construction works.
Arbitration is one of the preferred alternative dispute resolution processes and is finding increasing use in both the private and public sector.
It is considered an efficient alternative to litigation because it is quicker, less expensive, and provides greater flexibility of process and procedure.
The parties often select the arbitrator and exercise control over certain aspects of the arbitration procedure.
Arbitrators also bring domain expertise to the specific subject matter of the dispute, providing for a more efficient and quicker process.
Such domain skills are particularly useful in cases involving technical arbitration.
Evidence of commercial arbitration has been found in all periods of history.
It was updated in 1940, and again through the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, enacted in 1996.
Aimed at reducing the excessive workload on our courts, the Act streamlined the arbitration process.
The Legislation covered both international and domestic commercial arbitration and conciliation.
The renovated Arbitration Act of 2015 has further sanctified the arbitration process by granting even more finality to the arbitral award.
It has provided the business and private citizens with an approachable alternative to litigation.
In short, the quality of arbitrators will determine the credibility of the process.
Thank You.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be here today at the 184th Annual General Meeting of the Calcutta Chamber of Commerce (CCC) and to interact with its members.
The history of the Calcutta Chamber of Commerce approximates the history of modern commerce in India.
The Chamber, which is among the oldest of its kind, not only in India but the whole of Asia, has seen tumultuous changes- from the colonial commerce under British rule, to the industrialization of an independent India to the information revolution.
The Chamber has championed the cause of the local business and has worked to further growth of Commerce in Bengal and the Eastern India.
In addition to promoting commercial interests of its members, the Chamber has also taken a keen interest in improving the civic amenities and infrastructure in the city.
It has played an important role in shaping the rise of Calcutta, now Kolkata, as a modern metropolis.
I am informed that the Chamber had a catalytic role in development of the Calcutta-Burdwan railway line and of the iconic Howrah Bridge.
II The past is unquestionably glorious.
Our concern today is with the present and the immediate future.
Merchandise exports grew at a healthy annual average growth rate of 22% in the five years preceding the financial crisis.
After a small blip in 2010, exports smartly recovered and grew at 30% in the next two years post the crisis.
This fall in exports growth is disturbing.
In the last two decades, India's exports had diversified both in terms of markets and products.
Our export sector had also moved up the value chain.
The share of traditional exports like primary products, textiles, readymade garments, leather products and agriculture commodities has nearly halved from 56.5% in 1992 to 27.3% in 2014.
Our exports have also found new markets.
Asia and Africa together now account for 60% of India's total exports, up from 37% two decades ago.
It is based indicators grouped along three dimensions of industrial competitivenessâ€”capacity to produce and export manufactured goods, technology deepening and upgrading, and world impact.
The relative lack of technology input in Indian manufacturing can also be gauged by the share of medium and hi-tech activities in manufacturing exports in India.
Even in terms of productivity and efficiency, India needs to improve.
III To get back on a higher export growth trajectory, we in India would need to improve manufacturing competitiveness.
IV India's export performance is crucially linked to the performance of its domestic manufacturing sector.
India has the potential to manufacture and export a wide variety of goods.
However, this is just the beginning and more concrete steps need to be taken to achieve the desired objective.
Emphasis on the manufacturing sector, especially Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) will be critical to India's export growth.
Today, West Bengal, with a higher than national average GDP, stands ready to claim its rightful place in a rapidly growing India.
The State is fast becoming an attractive destination for investors and doing business in Bengal today is easier, simpler and faster.
Looking ahead, I believe that the local Chambers of Commerce have an important role to play in fostering innovation and competiveness of Indian manufacturers.
I am certain that the Calcutta Chamber of Commerce will leverage its vast experience and history to successfully play this part.
Jai Hind
The Insurance Institute of India, formerly the J.C. Setalvad Memorial Federation of Insurance Institutes, was setup in 1955 for the express purpose of promoting Insurance Education and Training in the country.
Insurance can mitigate the economic impact of events like illness, death, disability, fire, theft, and natural disaster on individuals, households, or enterprises.
Increasing the access of poor households to insurance mechanisms will prevent them from having to rely on publicly funded support systems.
In this way, insurance is a useful strategy on a continuum of risk management options.
Ensuring that poor households have access to insurance services should be priority for us in India.
III The Insurance industry in India has undergone transformational changes over the last 15 years.
Changes in the regulatory environment have encouraged the development of the industry.
Liberalization has led to the entry of the largest insurance companies in the world, with India becoming a priority destination among the emerging markets.
The industry has witnessed rapid growth, intensifying competition and significant expansion of the customer base.
Despite this growth spurt, insurance prevalence remains abysmally low.
Insurance penetration or premium volume as a ratio of GDP, for the year 2012-13, stood at 3.96%.
The provision of insurance for the poor, covering a variety of risks, could well be a key milestone in the fight against poverty.
IV The standard household risks of fire, theft, unemployment, sickness, and mortality are all more severe for poor families, the marginalized communities and rural households.
In India, a very large number of poor households derive their livelihoods from agriculture and face the additional risks of droughts, floods, pests and diseases affecting their crops and livestock.
About two-thirds of our population is dependent on agriculture.
The sector contributes about 17% to national GDP.
Yet agriculture in India is highly susceptible to risks like droughts, floods, pests and diseases.
In addition, the globalization of economy has created new threats linked to global demand and supply dynamics.
It is necessary to protect the farmers from natural vagaries and ensure their credit eligibility for the next season.
The high rate of suicides of farmers, and the subsequent social and economic impact on the family needs redress.
Sustainable agricultural insurance could be a possible step in this direction.
Crop insurance presently covers only about 12% of sown area and in most cases has an adverse claim to premium ratio.
There are problems with both the design and delivery of crop insurance schemes.
These problems could be overcome to some extent with rainfall insurance with a well developed rainfall measurement infrastructure.
Private and public insurers are currently experimenting with rainfall insurance products and the feedback seems encouraging.
There is a need to reduce the level of actuarially fair premium rates to make the insurance option attractive and affordable.
In parallel, under a long term and sustainable perspective, we also have to consider risk mitigation through improvements in the irrigation and water management infrastructure.
We can look at the successful experience from Africa where several countries, including Rwanda and Ghana, have undertaken ambitious reforms to expand health insurance to cover a significant share of the national population.
These models can be modified and adopted by us to expand the coverage of insurance in India.
The Government of India has created policies to promote financial inclusion and extend insurance cover to the poor through schemes such as the Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana, the Pradhanmantri Suraksha Beema Yojana and the Pradhanmantri Jeevan Jyoti Beema Yojana.
The Finance Minister has indicated that the government plans to cover at least 40% of the population using the plans launched under the three social security plans, which includes life insurance, accident cover and a pension scheme.
The main challenge is to encourage poor households to invest in insurance, as one of a menu of social protection instruments.
V The lack of equitable participation in the India growth story is of concern to the Government and financial services regulators.
I am certain that the Insurance Institute of India will continue to play an important role in this endeavor.
Thank you.
Jai Hind
I am happy to be amongst you all today to felicitate Prof. Mustansir Barma with the prestigious Gujar Mal Modi Award for his commendable contribution in the field of Science and Technology.
A number of historical, cultural, political, social and economic situations have given rise to the need to develop strategies that favour the popularization of science and technology.
The technical possibilities of gaining access to information are changing our vision of the world and transforming the relationship between human beings and the appropriation and dissemination of knowledge.
Today, access to knowledge is synonymous with development, well-being and quality of life.
The popularization of science and technology must make such knowledge a central component of culture, of social awareness and of collective intelligence.
It must also contribute to an effective address of cultural, social and economic issues.
The confirmation of Science Award every year, since 1988, on the birth anniversary of Late Shri Gujar Mal Modi is a tribute to the services done by him as an industrialist and philanthropist.
Born on 9th August, 1902 in humble background, Shri Gujar Mal had attained great heights as an industrialist and established a diverse and large business conglomerate.
He remained ever conscious about his responsibilities towards society and the various educational institutions, hospitals, temples and residential complexes founded by him are proof of his humanitarian qualities.
Prof. Mustansir Barma, a distinguished Professor and former Director, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai has made immense contribution in the field of Statistical Physics in India.
He has published numerous papers on the topic and is one of the best recognized names in the discipline internationally.
His personal initiative in expanding the TIFR campus in Hyderabad and his support and encouragement to younger scientists in exploring new areas is commendable.
I offer my heartiest congratulation to Prof. Mustansir and Gujar Mal Modi Foundation.
It does signal health rather than ill health of the Republic.
Since times immemorial, imperatives of statecraft have necessitated resort to intelligence operations and the use of intelligence agents.
Nizam-ul Mulk in the 11th century spelt it out with great precision.
The subject remains on the front burner.
Dear Students, Thank you for inviting me to the 22nd Convocation of the Himachal Pradesh University.
Since its establishment in 1970, the Himachal Pradesh University has rendered yeoman service to the cause of higher education.
Using both the formal and the distant learning modes, the University has made efforts to reach students in urban centres as also in the rural and tribal hinterland.
The focus of the syllabi on sustainable development, population research, tribal studies and environmental studies, as also on Integrated Himalayan Studies Centre is particularly noteworthy.
The orogeny or the process of mountain formation that began in the geological period known as Cretaceous continues to this day.
The active nature of geological forces in these mountains and their geographic location make them susceptible to a range of natural hazards- earthquakes, landslides, flash-floods, cloudbursts, soil erosion.
These natural hazards are magnified to the level of disasters when they overlap with human habitations and activities such as road building, agriculture, deforestation, mining and dam building.
II We live in a highly dynamic, human-dominated earth system in which non-linear, abrupt and irreversible environmental changes are becoming more frequent.
India makes up 2.4 percent of the world's land, while supporting 16 percent of the world's population.
The compounding result is a severely unsustainable use of natural resources for several generations.
Currently, India is experiencing rapid and widespread environmental degradation at alarming rates.
The impact of environmental changes and hazards is most significantly felt by those who live on ground zero.
Their livelihoods, habitation and sustenance- indeed their whole existence- is linked to the environment they live in.
This approach has been upheld by academic studies showing numerous community practices and 'traditional' environment management techniques to be historically sustainable.
Awareness has thus grown, that new institutional arrangements are needed to respond to the challenges of environmental valuation.
One result is advocacy of participatory decision-making and more contextually sensitive policies.
Participation thus expands the information and representation base, helps clarify and stabilize communications and power relationships between stakeholders, and encourages local ownership and accountability.
When stakeholders are excluded from the decision making process, they tend to feel removed from responsibility for the results.
III Ideas of greater transparency and inclusivity have become sufficiently influential to be incorporated into legislation and policy.
Our times are characterised by the awareness of human induced environmental problems, their impact, and the options for adoption and mitigation.
This will enhance the quality and implementation of decisions.
Also indicative of the new awareness at national policy making levels is the recent recommendation of the Finance Commission that hazard, risk and vulnerability assessment be made in all States.
For the 12th Plan, the Planning Commission had suggested preparation of an Environmental Protection Index (EPI) to recognize environmental performance by States and devolve central funds accordingly.
There is a clear need to go beyond GDP and market values when measuring development.
Human well-being and quality of life are important additional values, as are considerations of ecosystem services and the non-anthropocentric values of other living beings.
The time has come for us to re-examine the priorities, pathways, and qualitative and normative goals of sustainability.
I urge them to ponder over, and seek answers to, some of the teasing questions I have drawn attention to.
I wish them success in the life ahead.
Jai Hind
I congratulate the All India People's Science Network and all the participants for their valuable contributions towards promotion of scientific temper among our citizens and for their devoted advocacy of science and technology for progress and welfare of our people.
'How Scientific Illiteracy Threatens Our Future' was the subtitle of a book published a few years back in the United States.
Its authors argued that most of the urgent problems of the twenty first century require scientific solutions and yet the coverage of science in ordinary public discourse has dropped sharply.
The book urged that that 'this dangerous trend' be reversed and citizens' awareness of the importance of science to politics and society be enhanced.
For this reason, the theme of this session of the Congress, 'Science for Social change' is topical and important.
The interface between science and society has been a major influence in shaping the world and would continue to be the driving force behind the evolution of humanity in the future.
Given the multifaceted and symbiotic relationship between science and society and the critical role the former plays in the development of the latter, I would focus today on the importance of science for social change and its impact on society.
II Since the time of Archimedes, and before, science has arguably been the primary motor for social change in human history.
Today, Science is indispensable for addressing major contemporary challenges of economic growth and social transformation in societies.
The socio-economic health of a nation now depends, more and more on, among other factors, the health of the state of its science and technology.
Science presupposes, and emanates from, scientific method and its application to problems confronting humans.
It accords absolute priority to empirical investigations and logical reasoning.
It eschews a priori conclusions emanating from authority or tradition.
In its quest for truth, it makes space available for dissenting voices and alternate lines of investigation.
It thereby promotes a rational approach.
In societal matters, it induces a secular approach towards individual belief systems and helps fight against social intolerance.
The use of science and scientific method is essential for socio-economic development, through research in industry and agriculture, and a search for truth through experiment.
We can well say that imbibing scientific reasoning, and development of scientific outlook, is intrinsic to modernity in our times.
The wealth and prosperity of a nation today depend on the effective utilisation of its human and material resources through industrialisation based on scientific research and development.
Science expands the frontiers of productivity by creating more efficient manufacturing processes, newer raw materials and better equipped manpower.
New scientific techniques can also make up for a deficiency in natural resources.
These gaps can be bridged only through greater focus on the development of science and technology.
Science thus has a pivotal role in helping attain inclusive growth within nations and amongst them.
The founders of our Republic appreciated the criticality of this matter.
The outcome of our efforts has been a mixed one.
The debate is not merely a theoretical one.
The imperative in our own context is provided by the Constitution of India.
In fact, the latter three impede the eradication of the first three.
In other words, to fight poverty, hunger and disease we need to overcome ignorance, superstition and obscurantism.
The obvious instrumentality is education.
At one level, it overcomes ignorance in a formal sense.
The answer is in the negative; the reason, regrettably, is to be found in ideologies and social belief and practices that prevail in various segments of our society.
These disturbing trends need to be countered.
This can be done if citizens discharge their constitutional duties.
In a plural society, the sanctity of all sacred texts is to be observed.
The sacred text for the citizen quo citizen, it has been rightly observed, is the Constitution and the duties enjoined by it.
I thank you for having invited me.
I wish you all success in your deliberations during the 15th Congress.
Jai Hind.
I thank Ved Prakash Vaidik ji and Swami Agnivesh ji for urging me to participate.
It has been said, with justice, that Lala Lajpat Rai ranked among the first three leaders of our nationalist movement prior to the advent of Gandhi ji in the twenties, the other two being Bal Gangadhar Tilak and Bipin Chandra Pal.
Lala Lajat Rai’s name is the first on this list.
The text is given in volume 10, page 404 of Lala ji’s Collected Works and the names of all signatories is available in volume 4, pp 496-503, of the Selected Works of Motilal Nehru.
II The history of the early decades of the last century is in places characterised by competing narratives.
Different elements in the national movement, in agreement on the final objective, did not always converge in terms of methodology and tactics.
Its demise, and other happenings in that period, aggravated communitarian tensions with resultant impact on leaders of opinion.
Many in this audience know that tracing the evolution of national movements in contemporary history is a complex endeavour.
The role of individual actors on the scene thus assumed a role in the shaping of public perceptions.
At times, their own perceptions underwent changes of a far reaching nature.
On December 8, 1923, Lala Lajpat Rai gave the Presidential Address to the Punjab Provincial Political Conference at Jarawala.
He devoted this to the problem of communal harmony and surveyed the benefits and shortfalls of the Non-Cooperation Movement.
In a land of many religions and many cults this, in my view, is the best safeguard against religious or denominational partisanship.
A case in point is the series of thirteen articles written by Lala Lajpat Rai in the Tribune in November-December 1924.
Let us live and die for each other, so that India may live and prosper as a Nation.
India is neither Hindu nor Muslim.
It is not even both.
It is one.
It is India.’ Lala Lajpat Rai was an activist in the discourse on Indian nationalism and lent to it his version and understanding of it.
This also brought forth communitarian perceptions and ideas of strident Hindu and Muslim nationalisms subversive of secular values.
They, to use a phrase used by Gandhi ji, ‘encircled the nationalist dream like coils of a snake.’ The situational imperatives also had theoretical moorings.
Influence of thinkers like Mazzini and his ideas on cultural nationalism were evident in the writings of some Indian activists, including Lala ji.
Since conflicting ideologies were embedded in or attributed to identities of faith, it is a moot point whether a different approach may have produced less painful outcomes.
This, I concede, is now a hypothetical preposition.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be here today in this Conference on Skilling India for Global Competiveness.
I compliment the PHD Chamber of Commerce & Industry for their continued focus on this important issue of skill development, which will remain a critical ingredient in the realization of our inclusive development goals.
I recall attending a conference on skilling in schools, last year, also organized by the Chamber.
The Conference is well-timed.
It provides a useful platform for all stakeholders to deliberate on various aspects of skill development and perhaps more importantly find solutions to the related challenges.
In the twenty first century, the competiveness of a country in the global market place would depend on the strength of its economy, its contribution to existing and emerging branches of science and technology, and its ability to respond to the imperatives of a globalising world.
Knowledge and skills would increasingly become the primary determinants of economic growth and development.
Countries with higher and better levels of skills will adjust more effectively to the challenges and opportunities of growth in a globalized world.
For us in India, skill development would be critical for achieving faster, sustainable and inclusive growth on the one hand and for providing decent employment opportunities to the growing young population on the other.
India will remain a young nation and the largest contributor to the global workforce over the next few decades.
We will also have the world’s youngest work force with a median age well below that of the OECD countries and China.
Today, significant challenges need to be addressed before we can reap the demographic dividend.
Around 12 million youth enter the work force each year, most with poor education and negligible work skills.
The latest NSSO Survey indicates that the general education level of over 50% of our work force remains extremely low and only 10% of the labour force was vocationally trained.
It shows that 80% of the entrants to the work force do not have the opportunity for skill training.
India is among the countries in which employers are facing difficulty in filling up the jobs.
The lack of available applicants (only 61% of the working age population is available for work), inadequate domain knowledge and shortage of suitable employability, including soft skills, are some of the key reasons for the prevailing situation.
We turn out nearly seven lakh science and engineering graduates every year.
However, industry surveys show that only 25 percent of these are employable without further training.
Another study shows that only 10% of the MBA graduates are employable.
The picture is more dismal in other disciplines if recent, non-official employability reports are to be believed.
These findings have sparked off serious concerns about the mismatch between the education system and the needs of the job market.
The gaps in skill development should be identified so as to achieve the objectives in terms of quantity, quality, outreach and mobility.
The availability of both physical infrastructure and human resources to impart skill-based training should be addressed in an effective manner.
Quality and relevance of skill development are key to India’s global competitiveness, as well as improving an individual’s access to decent employment.
To increase the relevance of skill training with future labour markets, soft skills and entrepreneurship skills need to be made integral parts of skill development.
This would have to be complemented by making it economically rewarding for persons to become skilled.
According to the NSSO survey (2009-10), 84 per cent of our total workforce was in the unorganised sector and 93% in informal employment.
These workers generate around 60% of our GDP but form the bottom of the skill pyramid with low skills, poor productivity and low income.
An important challenge would be to reach out to this sector, as it is not supported by any structured skill development and training system.
The Report also spells out some grim socio-economic consequences that shortage of skilled labour could entail for our economy.
Government is cognizant of the importance of skill development for our national development and global competiveness.
The realization of this agenda will have to be based on a vigorous partnership between government, suppliers of educational services, industry and civil society.
Failure to do so would have serious economic and social implications for the country.
Jai Hind!
‘Education, Empowerment and Employability’ I am happy to be here today for the 11th Annual Convocation of Jamia Hamdard.
It is an important date in university’s calendar and a happy occasion on which we celebrate the academic excellence and achievements of the graduating students.
I congratulate the students who are graduating today, especially those who are being felicitated for their exemplary performance.
Their achievements and contributions are a source of joy and pride to their families, their university and the nation.
Jamia Hamdard was conceived, with exemplary vision, as a seat of higher learning by Hakeem Abdul Hameed Saheb as a means of fulfilling the goals of the Wakf.
Since then, it has emerged as an eminent institution of higher education.
The credit goes to the collective efforts of all stakeholders who have contributed to the positive evolution of the institution.
I pay my respects to the memory of Sayyed Hamid Saheb for his dedicated services to this institution till his last breath.
Students should draw inspiration from life and work of these personalities.
They must not forget to give back to the society, which has nurtured them.
It is estimated that by 2022, 63 per cent of our population will be in the working age group.
We are also one of the few countries where the working age population will be far in excess of those dependent on them, for at least three decades till 2040.
This demographic structure presents us with an opportunity of a potential ‘demographic dividend’, which tapped, could add to our growth potential, provided two conditions are fulfilled.
First, higher levels of education and skill development are achieved.
Nelson Mandela had called education the most powerful weapon which you can use to change the world.
It is the most potent tool to empower an individual or group, politically, socially and economically.
Productive and gainful employment based on relevant education and skills becomes the transformational ingredient in the all round empowerment of citizens and overall progress of a society.
Failure to do so would have serious economic and social implications for the country.
We have made progress since 1947 in the field of education at primary, secondary and tertiary levels.
India has the third largest higher education system in the world with around 30 million students enrolled in 45,000 institutions.
However, considerable challenges still remain.
Despite the growth in recent decades, enrollment levels remain below the world average.
Wide disparities exist in enrolment percentages across socio-religious groups, gender and geographies.
Dropout rates continue to be high at the primary and secondary levels.
The education sector is plagued by a shortage of well-trained faculty, poor infrastructure and outdated curricula.
Resources as a percentage of GDP allocated to education remain at less than the required level.
Credible surveys undertaken in the job market have brought forth some startling facts.
These findings have sparked serious concerns about the mismatch between the education system and the needs of the job market.
Nothing can be more disruptive for our social cohesion and sustained economic progress than a large army of educated, unemployed youth who feel disempowered, in every sense of the term.
Hence the need and urgency of addressing this issue comprehensively, if we are to emerge as a modern, progressive and prosperous society.
Yet another complicating factor, of more recent origin, is the emergence of a large number of institutions of higher education in the private sector.
What is required is to widen the reach, enhance affordability and improve quality of education so that it is accessible to all strata of society.
This would require dedication of more resources, creation of better physical and pedagogic infrastructure, modern and updated curricula and an effective regulatory framework.
This would be critical for achieving faster, sustainable and inclusive growth on the one hand and for providing decent employment opportunities to the growing young population and the needy sections of society on the other.
III I conclude by urging you to develop an urge for excellence and to persist in it.
Obtaining a university degree is not the end of your quest for knowledge.
As someone said, excellence is not a destination; it is a continuous journey that never ends.
So strive continuously for your own betterment and that of your society.
I wish the graduating students all success in their further studies, careers and lives and thank the Chancellor and Vice Chancellor for inviting me to this convocation.
Convocations are occasions to honour intellectual achievement and celebrate life in the academic world.
They mark the graduation of students from the safe haven of a temple of learning to the realities and challenges of life outside it.
The aim of education, as Herbert Spencer put it, is not only knowledge but also action.
The foundation of every state, said the philosopher Diogenes a long time back, is the education of its youth.
This is the challenge that beckons us as a nation today.
Given the nature of the challenge and the potential posited in the large number of our young people in institutions of higher education, the output of new knowledge in our country is by no means satisfactory.
Low levels of funding and segregation of the country’s R&D institutions from universities and colleges have been responsible for the weak research capacity of Indian universities.
It is disappointing that even the country’s top universities remain largely teaching-focused with limited research and doctoral education.
No Indian university figured amongst the top 200 universities in the Times Higher Education Rankings or the Academic Ranking of World Universities.
To face up to the increasing challenges in the new world order, our science & technology landscape needs to undergo a paradigm shift.
Emphasis should also be given on strengthening linkages between universities, R&D institutions, science academies and industry.
As India aspires for faster, sustainable and inclusive growth, our research and development system will need to play a defining role in achieving these national goals.
II Let me conclude by congratulating the graduating students and their families.
Their achievements are a source of joy and pride to them, the University and the nation.
They owe their success to their own hard work and commitment but they should also remain thankful to their parents and teachers for invaluable contributions in this success.
Seven Decades of Indian Democracy An Indian, with some awareness of the recent and not-so-recent past, comes to Warsaw with a deep sense of the vicissitudes of history.
Some three decades ago an eminent sociologist called Indian democracy "a secular miracle of the modern world and a model for other developing countries".
Seven decades after independence, the miracle of Indian democracy continues to shine like a beacon of hope for those who cherish freedom with its foundations in basic human values.
In our case, it dates back to at least the fifth century BC.
This long ‘argumentative tradition’ and toleration of heterodoxy has provided a fertile ground for the flourishing of our democracy.
In a contemporary sense, the democratic consciousness of independent India is a reflection of the legacy of our struggle for independence from colonial rule.
Much of the gains of our National Movement are enshrined in our Constitution and continue to enlighten the political and judicial discourse in India.
Our people have used this legacy as the yardstick to judge the subsequent performance of governments, political parties and institutions.
Our Constitution provides the framework for a bicameral parliamentary democracy in a quasi-federal framework.
Its objective is an equitable society to be achieved through a socio-economic transformation using constitutional institutions and the principle of Rule of Law.
The Constitution granted Universal Adult Suffrage to all the citizens at a time when it was not even conceded in many older democracies.
It proclaims a charter of rights and of duties.
It enunciates certain directive principles for state policy to ensure social, economic and political justice for the people.
It also delineates the legislative jurisdiction of the Union and State legislatures.
Periodic elections, an independent Election Commission and an independent judiciary having sweeping powers of judicial review, has helped foster a culture of democracy.
The magnitude of the conduct of elections in India is a challenge to any institutional framework.
The first general election was held in 1951 when the size of the electorate was 173 million.
The election was conducted through 930,000 voting centres and electronic voting machines.
Over 6 million personnel were mobilized for various electoral duties.
It has been rightly called the largest exercise in democracy ever.
Given our federal structure, periodic elections are held for State legislative assemblies, who also elect, through a prescribed procedure, members of Council of States of the Union Parliament.
Both in Parliament and in State Assemblies, special representation is given to the historically under-privileged segments of society.
Mandatory representation was given to women in village councils and municipalities through Constitutional amendments in 1992.
Measured against universally accepted norms and practices, Indian democracy has been a success and the democratic consciousness has seeped into the psyche of our public.
All democracies contain within them tensions between societal constraints and individual liberties, imperatives of state security and citizen’s freedom, as well as between the divergent political, social and economic approaches.
In our case social justice, acceptance and implementation of diversity, and prevention and correctives to social discord, remain perennial challenges.
India is a plural society of immense diversity with different social, religious, cultural and linguistic expressions.
The Constitution recognises 22 languages and over a hundred dialects.
The value of currency units is written in 17 different scripts.
Adherents of all major religions of the world are present in our citizen body.
Containment of social discord remains a recurring challenge.
All segments of our society, regardless of faith, are stratified in socio-economic categories with deep roots in the past.
In such diversity - regional, social, linguistic and religious - tensions are unavoidable, and at times they escalate into conflict.
Democracy in India has taken equality and social inclusion as one of its objectives.
Institutions of democracy have served as a medium by which communities and peoples have come to assert their dignity and demand social and economic equality.
Democracy has also been a harbinger of social empowerment.
As a result of the system of institutionalized open political competition, the historically marginalized segments have been mobilized to challenge the societal status-quo.
This mobilization has resulted in a substantive deepening of Indian democracy.
There has also been a spatial expansion of democracy in India.
A federal political structure process, both at independence and more recently in the passing of the Seventy-Third Constitutional Amendment, has helped ensure the accommodation of regional aspirations.
Two of the most liberal and empowering pieces of legislation that India has adopted in recent times -  giving the citizens the Right to Information and the Right to free basic education - were both spearheaded by the civil society organizations in India.
Operation of democracy also ensures that we have financial inclusion schemes, and are universalising education, social health and insurance programs.
We are modernizing our agriculture, manufacturing and services and are trying to adopt digital transactions.
Our human development index, modest as yet, is rising and in some more developed regions like Kerala, approximates those of developed nations.
New economic policies, including the liberalization programme, were fostered in a democratic and deliberative environment.
India is now getting used to its much higher rate of growth.
Such growth has allowed us to lift millions of Indians out of abject poverty and to offer them a better quality of life.
Our per capita income, in the same period, increased almost 15 times in terms of current and 12 times in constant prices.
The growing Indian middle class is now a market of global significance.
Well before India proceeded on its democratic journey, our founding fathers had understood that injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere.
A democratic India, therefore, stood in solidarity with the people of Africa and other Asian countries who were struggling to take charge of their own destiny by overthrowing the chains of colonial power.
India remained a strong partner as they sought independence and self-sufficiency.
India sees democratic and peaceful means not only as means to resolve the differences within countries, but also supports the democratisation of international relations and global governance.
The largest challenges that face humanity today, be it the impact of climate change or the rising tide of extremism and terrorism, require cooperation and collaboration between all nations of the world for their resolution.
Operating a democracy is always work in progress.
Despite the success of democracy in India there still remain a number of challenges to deepening and consolidation of democracy.
Democracy is a self-correcting and self-improving mechanism.
The solution to addressing the gaps and failings of democracy is indeed more democracy.
A majority, no matter how overwhelming, does not invalidate opposition.
The one crucial test of a true democracy is how it protects and respects the rights of minorities, be they religious, or political, especially in face of populist currents.
A democracy only flourishes when divergent voices can be freely heard without fear of an official or populist backlash.
Democracy, in the end, is about people.
The people of India, the masses, are the best guarantee for our democratic future.
Some Thoughts on the Sacred and Secular in International Relations I thank Prof. Sapory for inviting me today.
Being in the salubrious surroundings of this campus is always satisfying.
The subject of this conference is of interest to most observers of the global scene.
My own curiosity dwells on themes secreted in the interstices of perceptions that induce state action.
One of these pertains to the presence or absence of sacred and secular impulses in the enunciation of state policy and state action.
We know that each age and most societies developed and practiced their world view as part of the apparatus of governance and the achievement of the objectives of their national interest.
In pursuit of this, legitimacy and empowerment was often sought from ideals considered fundamental by the society concerned.
Some of these were premised on philosophical ideals, others implicitly or expressly on religious ones.
Each, as Edward Gibbon put it in relation to ancient Rome, was ‘useful’ to the ruling establishment.
The first half of the twentieth century witnessed a general secularization of the political discourse in most parts of the world.
There were, nevertheless, notable exceptions.
In the forties states were founded, based on self-validating ‘mythistory’, overtly on religious foundations and for specific faiths.
More recently, political movements premised on specific objectives or grievances of socio-political nature, have empowered themselves by this methodology and are threatening the foundations of the modern state system.
For this reason, a study of international relations also necessitates the location, if any, of the overlap and interaction between politics and religion.
Instances abound in history.
In 1968 the sociologist Peter Berger wrote that modernisation necessarily leads to a decline in religion in societies and individuals.
These conclusions reflect emerging trends in societies of different faiths the world over.
Instead, they disown modernity and are selective in their espousal of democracy.
Religion in statecraft has been used for different purposes and objectives: as an instrument of regime legitimacy, for justifying the status quo in terms of policies and postures, for a politically mobilizing role to articulate dissent.
Each has an impact on the circle of inclusion or exclusion.
In this perspective, a number of questions do arise.
Such projections are increasingly at variance with the accepted norms of international conduct.
Local, regional and global considerations do lead to situations in which such policies are viewed as a source of tension.
Thus, it is a challenge to all those who live in, and want to continue living in, secular societies.
This cannot but induce latent or actual conflict of values and principles.
Secularism is a modality, not a dogma.
Since then, different societies have developed their own versions of it in theory and practice.
It does not, as Rejeev Bhargava has pointed out, ‘erect a strict wall of separation’ between religion and state but, instead, proposes ‘a principled distance’ between them.
It would seek to lessen the contradiction between technological globalisation and ‘tribalisation’ of the mind.
Some pitfalls in the path of such an ideal approach are identifiable.
They emanate from gaps, purposeful or otherwise, between commitment and practice.
Both detract from, or subvert, secular values.
A truly modern approach should eschew both and go beyond mere tolerance and religio-philosophical notions to positive acceptance and accommodation on the basis of equal citizenship in actual practice.
Admittedly, such an adjustment would be difficult; but so were earlier conceptual correctives in history.
Mercifully, the human mind is conditioned to adapt.
The present may be one of those occasions!
Jai Hind
The Conference brings together distinguished Judges, environmentalists, scientists, lawyers, experts and members of civil society from India and abroad to discuss important environmental issues.
It has a comprehensive and relevant agenda before it.
This gathering provides a useful platform to the participants for deliberating on important environmental issues, which are of global interest and concern.
Better understanding of these issues and perhaps some solutions, preventive or remedial, to these challenges may emerge from the discussions during the course of the Conference.
Environmental degradation and climate change are amongst the foremost challenges confronting human civilization in our times.
The protection and preservation of environment and its sustainable management are essential for the survival of humanity and our planet.
Environment is a public good.
It is not owned by any one individual.
Human activities result in significant environmental changes that cause damage to species, ecosystems and ecological processes.
The impact of indiscriminate human action and insatiable consumption on the global environment has manifested itself, in what is widely accepted, as the phenomenon of climate change.
This has been coupled with rapid depletion or pollution of natural resources.
The key environmental challenge that a developing country, such as India, faces relate to the nexus of environmental degradation with poverty in its many dimensions, and economic growth.
It is thus important to understand the dichotomous relationship between economic growth and environmental degradation.
The latter is most critical to its success Unsustainable consumption patterns, particularly in industrialized countries also have serious adverse impacts on the environment, both local, and global.
The global impacts are largely manifest in developing countries, and further aggravate poverty.
It is said and well said that humans are the only species who destroy the environment.
Sustainability of economic development crucially hinges on the protection of environment.
For us in India, challenges of arresting the pace of degradation of environment are formidable due to the imperatives of maintaining high economic growth, increasing trends of urbanisation, population growth, industrialisation, unmet basic needs, life style changes and biotic pressures.
The threat of climate change is a serious global concern.
There is near consensus among scientists that climate change is unequivocal.
Increase in anthropogenic activities has built up concentration of Greenhouse Gases in our atmosphere, leading to global warming.
These developments can have a serious impact on sustainability of water resources, agriculture, forests and ecosystems, affecting the well-being of billions of people.
In India, protecting and improving the natural environment is a fundamental duty of every citizen as per the Constitution.
Domestic policies have been tailored to take into account the environmental impact assessments.
Institutions to implement and monitor these policies have been set up at the centre and state level.
India has also been active in international forums relating to environmental protection, and is party to 94 multilaterals environmental agreements.
However, much more needs to be done to translate commitments into action and results.
Globally, India’s policy goal of achieving sustainable development and addressing emerging global environmental concerns is guided by the principle of ‘common but differentiated responsibility’.
India prefers an ‘aspirational’ rather than a mandatory or ‘prescriptive’ approach.
We believe that the issue of sustainable development should be approached with a sense of equity; and the development aspirations of the developing countries should be built into the green economy principles being evolved at the international level.
Whatever our respective national positions on these issues, the protection and preservation of environment is the common responsibility of all humanity.
This does calls for closer cooperation among nations and a holistic approach.
Failure to do so would have serious consequences.
Environment is characterised by interconnectedness that transcends national/international boundaries.
Hence, protection of environment and its management has to be a collective endeavour involving all stakeholders at global, regional and local levels.
Your gathering here is a manifestation of the human will and desire to come together and solve one of the critical problems confronting our planet.
I wish you all success.
I thank Justice Swatanter Kumar for inviting me.
I am happy to be with you here in Bhuj today for the Fifth Convocation of the Krantiguru Shyamji Krishna Varma Kachchh University.
I take this opportunity to pay my homage to an illustrious son of this region and our country.
Pandit Shyamji Krishna Varma was an ardent patriot and a fearless freedom fighter, a philanthropist, a lawyer, a journalist, and a revolutionary writer, who devoted his entire life to our struggle for freedom.
His exemplary life and work should continue to be a source of inspiration for all of us.
The decision of the Gujarat Government to set up this University to fulfill the educational needs of the people of Kachchh is commendable.
The region has its own challenges presented by nature, but its people are well known for their optimism, resilience and industry.
Quality higher education, which is amongst the basic requirements for development, would help them mitigate the effects of some of these challenges and enjoy the fruits of development.
The University, in over a decade of its existence, is on the path to establishing itself as a premier institution of higher learning.
It is becoming known for providing quality instruction in science, engineering, humanities, social sciences, commerce and law.
The credit goes to the collective efforts of the students, faculty, staff and alumni of the institution.
I extend my heartiest congratulations to the students graduating today.
They owe their success to their own hardwork and dedication.
In this hour of success, however, they must not forget the vital role played by their parents and teachers who have helped them in achieving their objectives.
Their journey in life now begins.
So keep learning and pursue excellence.
Strive to become better human beings for your own sake and for the society you live in.
II Kachchh was historically a backward region of Gujarat.
The destructive earthquake of 2001 worsened the situation.
Kachchh today is a growing economic and industrial hub in one of India’s fastest growing states.
However, diverse challenges in terms of economy, society and geography still remain, which need to be addressed.
This is true not just for this region but also in other parts of the country.
As this region and our country moves ahead on the path rapid economic growth and development, we must remain vigilant that this growth is inclusive and sustainable.
The goal of economic growth is overall development of all our people.
Human development is the end - economic growth a means.
The purpose of growth should be to enrich people's lives, in all aspects.
The recent decades show all too clearly that there is no automatic link between growth and equity, including human development.
It is also true that both are interconnected.
Short-term advances in human development are possible - but they will not be sustainable without further growth.
Conversely, economic growth is not sustainable without human development.
We are also number one in global ranking in adult illiteracy, with 287 million adult illiterates.
Variations in development also exist between different states of the Union and between regions and individual districts within a state.
To achieve inclusiveness or equity in all these dimensions requires multiple interventions by the Central and State governments, private sector, NGOs, civil society and each one of us.
Its success will depend not only on new policies and government programmes, but on a collective and conscious effort of all sections of society.
There need be no conflict between growth and equity.
China, Malaysia and Mauritius have followed a similar route in recent times.
But no less than 64% can be attributed to human and social capital.
Therefore, a strategy for economic growth that emphasizes people and their productive potential is the only way to achieve faster, more inclusive and sustainable growth envelopment.
III A university builds its reputation on good and innovative courses, quality teaching and research and a faculty that motivates.
Its students need to understand the problems of society in its immediate environment and help in resolving them through their knowledge and expertise.
The Shyamji Krishna Varma Kachchh University, I understand, is doing so by grooming able, efficient and competent students for serving the region, state and the country.
This is for them a day of joy and satisfaction.
We share their happiness and rejoice in their success.
I wish them all the best in their careers and happiness in their lives.
I am confident that they will take their ideals and dreams forward and work for the good of society and the country.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be here today in Mumbai at the Indian Merchants’ Chamber (IMC).
This is an iconic organization which has a rich legacy of representing and promoting Indian business for over a hundred years.
I believe that Mahatma Gandhi was associated with the Chamber as an Honorary Member; a truly rare honour for any institution.
It is a laudable objective and deserves our commendation.
Since independence, our country has made significant progress in most aspects of economy and society.
India has emerged as the third largest economy in the world, in Purchasing Power Parity terms.
Socio-economic indicators, such poverty, unemployment, inequality, health, education, housing, sanitation etc have shown considerable improvement, especially in last two decades.
We have attained self-reliance in most agricultural products and are even exporting some of them.
Our services sector is counted amongst the best in the world.
India’s share in global trade and investment has been on the upward trend, albeit modestly.
In these endeavours, the public and the private sector have been equal partners.
Both have made valuable contributions to the national growth and development agenda.
Inequality in social and economic terms is a stark reality.
Unemployment is rampant.
Hunger, malnutrition, disease, illiteracy and homelessness still afflict a large section of our vast population.
Our Manufacturing capabilities and the Services sector need to grow, in terms of quantity and quality, if we are to match the levels of other developing countries, such as Brazil and China.
Given the size of our economy, our share in global trade and investment also should be much higher.
This audience is aware of the strengths and weaknesses of our economy and society and what needs to be done for us to embark on faster, more inclusive and sustainable growth.
One aspect of it is the ongoing debate on ‘growth versus equity’ in our national development strategy.
The IMC has also adopted ‘growth with governance’ as the theme for its activities in 2014-15.
Allow me, therefore, to dwell on the role of business in promoting growth with equity, as part of the national development agenda, including in the context of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR).
There is a need to focus on the words ‘social’ and ‘responsibility’.
These relate to the wider objective of development: to achieve broad-based improvement in the economic and social conditions of our people.
An essential requisite for it is continuous growth of GDP at accelerating pace.
Empirical evidence shows that growth without equity is not sustainable in the long run.
On the other hand, desired levels of equity or inclusion cannot be attained without rapid and sustained growth.
Hence the solution is not in ‘either-or’ but in ‘both’.
I will focus here on the role of business.
Businesses promote growth directly by increasing production and output.
They help in inclusion by generating productive employment and creating wealth.
It goes beyond charity and philanthropy.
Indian entrepreneurs and business enterprises have a long tradition of working within the values that have defined our nation's ethos; whether it was endowing institutions to actively participate in India’s freedom movement, or imbuing them with the idea of trusteeship.
CSR in India has traditionally been seen as a philanthropic activity.
Over the years, it has evolved from institution building to community development through educational, cultural or research projects.
It now needs to move forward from community development to becoming more strategic in nature by getting linked with business.
According to the Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs, a minimum of 6,000 Indian companies are required to undertake CSR projects under its provisions.
While this cannot be the panacea for all our ills, it can certainly be a valuable contribution towards our national developmental effort.
In my view, there is a greater potential for CSR efforts from the business community.
The answer however does not lie in enacting new laws to make CSR mandatory for all.
It has a greater chance of success through voluntary commitments by all able enterprises, in private or public sector.
This holds good for our social edifice also.
In addition, more resources and greater efforts need to be devoted to the weakest structures in our society for the social and educational development.
This will ensure greater social harmony so essential for national prosperity.
I thank you for having invited me.
I wish you all success in your endeavours.
Jai Hind
I deem it an honour to be invited by the Indian Society of International Law to address the World Congress on International Law.
This distinguished galaxy of Justices, Judges of the International Court, legal scholars and lawyers constitutes a formidable and learned audience.
The relevance of international law in today’s rapidly changing world, and the new challenges we have to collectively address, is a good subject for serious cogitation.
International Law as it is now understood and practiced is of relatively recent origin.
It owes its origin primarily to the Westphalian World Order forged in Europe in the 17th century.
Its beginnings, modest and limited, coincide with the rise of nation states in Europe, bore its stamp and focused on common values and the reciprocity of interests.
The principles of sovereignty and legal equality of states were first enunciated by the Dutch jurist Hugo Grotius in 1625.
The two World Wars presented fresh challenges to the principles and practices of international law.
These related to rectification of boundaries, care of refugees and administration of the territory of the defeated enemy.
Efforts to address these and related issues through the creation of the League of Nations were unsuccessful.
This failure, and the horrors of World War II, led to appreciation of the necessity of international cooperation and the formation of the United Nations as a body capable of ensuring obedience to international law and maintaining peace.
International cooperation was widely accepted, though not universally.
The first few decades in particular gave cause for optimism.
The UN assisted the process of decolonization and the effort to end Apartheid.
The UN Multilateral system contributed to the enunciation of normative principles to regulate international conduct.
Questions such as disarmament, social development, gender equality, population, food and water and a host of problems relevant for the developing world were addressed.
Common trans-national services related to civil aviation, maritime regulations, health, telecommunications, postal systems, refugees, world weather and food security were put in place.
193 nations are now members of the UN and subscribe to its Charter.
The founding fathers of India’s Constitution accepted these broad principles and incorporated them in the Directive Principles of State policy.
It is a voluntary association of sovereign nation States.
For this reason, some parts of international law remain highly contested.
A case in point is the Charter of the International Court of Justice and its Optional clause.
Conflicts of laws in civil law jurisdictions, which constitutes Private International Law, seeks to address disputes between business corporations outside a unified legal framework.
This has led to increasing use of commercial arbitration (Under the New York Convention 1958).
There is also the growing application of Supra-National law to address global commons and such international issues relating to new technologies, evolutions in genetic sciences and problems presented by pandemics and catastrophic disaster events.
Globalisation has not only increased the importance of international law but also the complexity of international legal issues.
The power structure of the Organization created in 1945 clearly reflected the power realities of the world after the Second World War.
It was dominated by the victors of the Second World War who fashioned its modalities to further and facilitate the pursuit of power in political and economic terms.
Much has changed in the world since then, but the underlying realities of the power lesson remain true.
There is a growing perception that there has been a decline in multilateralism.
The UN’s Charter functions in the area of money, finance, trade, expenditure, indebtedness and developmental strategies have been transferred to IMF, World Bank and WTO.
In these bodies the major economic powers, because of their voting power or the power of retaliation (WTO) have come to dominate the decision making in these vital areas.
In the area of development the focus is on the economic and social problems of developing countries and their internal governance issues.
Here too, in the name of globalization, the thrust is on the open market, foreign investment, lowering tariffs and reducing the role of the State.
Another important, and in some ways a game changing development, relates to the funding of the UN.
This feature has been effectively used by the major powers to impose their own priorities on the UN, by dominating its budgeting, accounting and administrative apparatus.
This has resulted in the dilution of the UN’s regulatory and norm setting activities.
III Although international laws and the institutions created to further its influence and application have grown significantly over the last six decades, International Law is at a crossroads and needs new direction.
While it is trying to cope with transnational concerns relating to pandemics, narcotics, illegal trafficking in human beings and arms, it cannot escape addressing some fundamental issues.
A few of these need to be mentioned here:   Here then is the challenge to International Law and the organizations that are responsible for its implementation.
I thank the Indian Society of International Law, and Dr. Natchiappan for inviting me.
I wish this conference success in its deliberations.
Jai Hind.
This year is a special one.
Gandhi ji was also, unquestionably, the greatest Pravasi Bharatiya of all.
I congratulate the winners of this year’s Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards.
We are grateful for their contributions to society.
They are deserving recipients of this recognition.
Through their exemplary work, they have also proved to be outstanding envoys of peace, friendship and cooperation between India and countries of their residence.
Today, Overseas Indians are estimated to be around 25 million.
They are in virtually every country and region of the world.
Jidhar dekhta hoon faqat tu hi tu hai.
They have, like most of us, multiple identities: a common denominator is their emotional bond to India, and to its cultural legacy.
The institution of the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas is an occasion of bonding.
Beyond these emotional bonds, and nourishing them, are modern day economic imperatives.
They also help propel in varying degrees economic activity in their home states.
The more affluent segments of the NRI groups are increasingly a source of investments in diverse fields including information technology, healthcare, energy, mineral resources, retail, hospitality, gems & jewellery etc.
Friends, Relationships, even emotional ones, are not a one-way street.
The Overseas Indians have expectations aimed at facilitating and intensifying their involvement with India.
India aspires for a better place in the comity of nations.
Both of these require rapid economic development, accompanied by better educational, health and social parameters.
This requires a massive collective effort by all segments of our population.
The governments at central and state levels need to provide visionary leadership and are determined to do so.
In this endeavour, an important role can be and must be played by the Overseas Indians.
We welcome such initiatives, which will replicate these valuable experiences here and save us from reinventing the wheel.
It is essential that the new generations at both ends continue and strengthen this mutually beneficial bond.
The Youth Pravasi Bharatiya Divas organized on the 7th of January is a good step in the right direction.
I thank you all for your presence today.
We hope to see back in the years ahead.
We will continue working closely together in order to realize our collective desire to see India as a modern and prosperous nation.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be here today to inaugurate the Republic Day Camp of the National Cadet Corps.
I extend my greetings and good wishes to all of you for a happy, healthy and prosperous New Year.
The National Cadet Corps brings together young men and women from different parts of our country.
They are motivated and trained into becoming responsible and disciplined citizens of tomorrow.
These go a long way in building a harmonious and creative society.
The Republic Day Camp will be a memorable experience for you.
It will give you an opportunity to meet and interact with cadets from different regions of our land.
You will forge bonds of friendship and it will make you understand better the ‘unity in diversity’ of our country.
Every society has fault lines based on social, economic and political differences.
We are no exception.
We still face challenges of poverty and under-development on one hand and communalism, casteism, linguistic and regional chauvinism on the other.
The duty of a good citizen is to remain true to the constitutional principles of liberty, equality, fraternity and justice for all.
Your tenure in the NCC should help you reinforce its foundations.
I commend the NCC for its efforts to raise awareness on such issues as AIDS, Adult education, Leprosy, Drugs, Dowry, Tobacco Abuse, Vigilance and Corruption.
These are social ills which have to be eradicated for the good of our people.
The National Cadet Corps sets a shining example of national integration and communal harmony.
It has discharged its responsibilities towards the nation with honesty and dedication.
You the cadets, who have been specially selected to represent various states of our Union, are the pillars of the Corps.
I am confident that during this camp you will imbibe the virtues of professional excellence, discipline, team work and above all a deep commitment to selfless service of society and the country.
I compliment the NCC for fostering the spirit of adventure amongst the youth.
The planned summit to Mount Everest by NCC Girl Cadets in 2016 is a step in this direction.
I also congratulate you on the success of the NCC National Games held in October 2014.
Jai Hind.
College of Engineering is amongst the earliest self-financing engineering colleges in the country and is recognized as one of the leading technical education institutions in the country.
The credit goes to the collective efforts of all stakeholders who have, over the last five decades, contributed to the positive evolution of the College.
They are all equally deserving of our commendation and applause.
Imparting quality education to our youth is one of the highest forms of service, an individual or institution, can render to the nation.
Its importance was best described by the Greek philosopher, Diogenes, who said ‘the foundation of every state is the education of its youth’.
Education is a critical tool for developing a modern economy, a just society and a vibrant polity.
It provides skills and competencies for economic well-being and social mobility.
Education strengthens democracy by imparting to citizens the tools needed to fully participate in the governance process.
It also acts as an integrative force in society, imparting values that foster social cohesion and national identity.
A well educated population, equipped with the relevant knowledge, attitudes and skills is essential for economic and social development in this century.
India has a younger population not only in comparison to advanced economies but also in relation to the large developing countries.
In 2011, around 50% of our population was less than 24 years of age.
By 2020, around two thirds of our population will be in the working age group (15-64 years).
Over the next 20 years, labour force in India is expected to increase, while it will decline in industrialized countries and in China.
This demographic structure presents us with an opportunity of a potential ‘demographic dividend’, which tapped, could add to our growth potential, provided two conditions are fulfilled.
First, higher levels of health, education and skill development are achieved.
It is thus evident that education is a vital ingredient for actualizing the ‘demographic dividend’ and for achieving higher, sustainable and more inclusive economic growth.
We have made progress in the field of higher education since 1947.
Today, India has the third largest higher education system in the world.
They also provide affiliation to more than 33,000 colleges and institutes.
However, our higher education system continues to be afflicted with the three problems of access, equity and quality.
Enrollment rates in our higher education institutions have gone up to around 17% but are still well below the world average of 26 per cent.
Wide disparities exist in enrolment percentages among the States and between urban and rural areas while disadvantaged sections of society and women have significantly lower enrolments than the national average.
The higher education sector is plagued by a shortage of well-trained faculty, poor infrastructure and outdated and irrelevant curricula.
The use of technology in remains limited and standards of research and teaching at Indian universities are far below international standard.
Curricular reforms leading to regular revision and upgrading of curricula, introduction of semester system, choice-based credit system, and examination reforms are yet to take place in higher educational institutions across the country.
Exceptions apart, majority of our higher education institutions perform poorly in the area of quality on a relative global scale.
Our system turns out nearly seven lakh science and engineering graduates every year.
However, industry surveys show that only 25 percent of these are employable, without further training.
The picture is more dismal in other disciplines if a recent, non-official, employability report is to be believed.
In recent years, the massive expansion in enrolment in higher education in the country has resulted in unbearable burden being put on the physical and pedagogic infrastructure of colleges and universities.
This is reflected in overcrowded classrooms and distortion of desirable student-teacher ratios, overall shortage of teaching and tutorial space, overloading of laboratory and library facilities, and often a lowering of quality of teaching.
All these issues require urgent correctives.
Curricular and academic reforms are required to improve student choices, with a fine balance between the market oriented professional and liberal higher education.
Higher education must be aligned to the country’s economy and also to the needs of the global market.
Another aspect relates to the fact that today, around 60% of total enrolments in higher education are in private institutions.
Some of them excel in their chosen areas.
I once again extend my greetings and best wishes to all of you on this happy occasion.
I wish you every success in the years ahead.
I thank you for having invited me.
Jai Hind
I therefore deem it a great privilege to be invited by the Indian History Congress to inaugurate its 75th session.
I felicitate the Congress on reaching this landmark.
History also cannot be faith-based.
It is a narrative of change.
It has been suggested that historical objectivity is seen to be not a single idea but rather sprawling sets of assumptions, attitudes, aspirations and antipathies.
It is evident that on most if not all occasions, the narrative is contested.
Such contestations nevertheless need to have a basis in facts, demonstrable and logically sustainable.
It is thus evident that methodology is critical to the study of history.
Efforts to curb ‘intellectual efflorescence’ through official dicta can only be viewed as undesirable.
Furthermore, contestations over the historical past need civility of discourse to ensure that it does not cross the imperatives of ensuring social peace and societal cohesion.
Those mistakes relate to frailties in judgement leading to mistakes in statecraft and governance.
These as one historian has put it, could be due to tyranny or oppression, excessive ambition, incompetence or decadence, and folly or perversity.
Alongside, manuals were penned for the guidance of rulers.
Departures from these and the resulting consequences is what historians have dwelt upon.
History writing, and history teaching, has a contemporary relevance in a more evident sense.
We live in a world of nation states but the idea of a homogenous nation state is clearly problematic.
Diversity is identifiable even in the most homogeneous of societies today.
The global scene in modern times has been replete with complexities and tensions of what has been called the national question.
It is no longer a matter of debate that history has to be more than narrowly political or economic.
The imperative is to make it comprehensive and inclusive of neglected groups in society.
These subaltern classes, as Gramci had pointed out, are not unified and their history therefore has to be intertwined with that of civil society.
The methodology of studying these opened up new and enriching vistas of study for historians.
The pasture of stupidity, said the great medieval historian Ibn Khaldun, is unwholesome for mankind.
Allow me to draw attention to section IV focused on countries other than India.
People living in coastal regions have traditionally depended on the sea for their livelihood.
They are one with the sea and the sea is an integral ingredient of their worldview.
The maritime people of India are no exception to this and trading activities of Indians in coastal areas in ancient and medieval periods testify to this.
‘Our culture’, wrote a Katchi scholar some years back, ‘is wet with the sea.’  Prior to the arrival of the Portuguese in the sixteenth century in the seas around India, trade in the Indian Ocean region was characterized by a group of ports (sometimes in virtual independence of land powers in the hinterland).
Surat and Calicut on the west coast and Masulipatnam and a number of ports on the Coromandel coast in the east stand out in historical and commercial records.
The Portuguese, followed by the Dutch and the British, intruded on this autonomous regional activity and began to change its character and its multiple human faces.
In subsequent centuries, European colonial empires effectively put an end to it.
Apart from the earlier work of Radha Kumud Mookerji, the studies conducted by S. Arasaratnam and Ashin Das Gupta in the second half of the last century and some excellent monographs by European and Australian scholars, sufficient research work on these aspects of our history has yet to be done.
Another region deserving attention is beyond the sub-continent in north and North West.
The situation of historical scholarship relating to Afghanistan and Central Asian republics is no better.
The extant works worthy of mention relate to the period before 1947.
Each of these societies is relevant to us in economic, strategic and social terms; each necessitates much greater scholarly attention.
History cannot be studied in isolation.
I congratulate once again the Indian History Congress on its 75th anniversary and wish it decades of fruitful work in the future.
I thank the Vice Chancellor, Professor Sopory, for inviting me today.
Jai Hind.
I am delighted to have this opportunity to address this business summit, which is aimed at furthering economic cooperation between India and Poland.
India sees Poland as an important emerging economic partner, not just in Europe but in the world.
Poland’s transformation over the last two decades  has been remarkable; the growth of its economy impressive.
This change is visible all around us.
I understand that this marked a growth of nearly 25% over the level of trade in the previous year.
Investments are growing rapidly in both directions.
This strong economic interaction between India and Poland is an indicator of the growing economic strengths of our countries.
As Polish business looks for markets and business opportunities beyond Europe, India is a natural destination.
With a growth rate of over 7%, despite the general global downturn, India today is not just the fastest growing major economy in the world, it is also one of the most open and welcoming destination for investments and technologies.
The constant reforms in fiscal and investment facilitation policies are transforming the economic scenario in India.
Increasing transparency and a liberalised investment climate now allows the smooth flow of FDI in sectors like defence, railways, civil aviation and pharmaceuticals.
We have seen a strong global confidence in the India story, with a surge in Foreign Direct Investments, which reached over US $ 50 billion in 2016.
India’s 29 states now offer a climate of both cooperative and competitive federalism, with quantum improvements in investment conditions in different Indian states.
Cooperation in the education sector can become an important area of cooperation for us.
We already have some 2500 Indian students in Poland.
These students add to the resources of Poland’s distinguished universities and will act as bridgeheads for our future engagements.
I understand that the delegation led by the Deputy Prime Minister, His Excellency Prof. Piotr Glinski that visited India in January for the Vibrant Gujarat Summit, had useful interactions with our political leadership and our business community.
We have identified possible opportunities in sectors like food processing, mining, aerospace and defence.
I wish this business summit all success.
I happy to be here today for the inauguration of the Chemical Engineering Congress (CHEMCON 2014) organized by the Indian Institute of Chemical Engineers (IIChE), in collaboration with the Shanti Swaroop Bhatnagar University Institute of Chemical Engineering & Technology, Panjab University.
CHEMCON 2014 coincides with the 67th Annual session of the IIChE.
The chosen theme "Chemical Engineering-Emerging Dimensions and Challenges Ahead" is topical and of common interest.
IIChE is the premier national body for Chemical Engineers.
CHEMCON, its annual flagship event, provides all stakeholders, from India and abroad, a valuable platform to share knowledge and experiences and discuss the current trends and future developments in the field of chemical engineering.
Chemical Engineering is required for meeting the basic needs of humanity in terms of food, water and energy security, environmental sustainability, healthcare, manufacturing, etc.
Chemical industry contributes significantly to improving the quality of life through breakthrough innovations facilitating pure drinking water, faster medical treatment, stronger homes and greener fuels.
Chemical engineering is also relevant for many new scientific advances which are taking place in diverse fields such as genetic foods, smart materials, drug delivery systems, agro-based technology, biotechnology, microelectronics, nanotechnology and advanced materials etc.
Chemical engineering will therefore remain critical for the economic development of any country, providing products and enabling technical solutions in virtually all sectors of the economy.
In India, Chemical Industry is one of the oldest industries.
It provides valuable chemicals for various end products such as textiles, paper, pharmaceuticals, fertilisers, paints, leather etc., which are required in almost all walks of life.
The Indian Chemical Industry forms the backbone of the industrial and agricultural development of the country and provides building blocks for downstream industries.
Since independence, the industry has made significant progress.
According to a Planning Commission paper prepared for the 12th Five Year Plan, Indian chemical industry in 2010, with the size of $108 billion, accounted for approximately 7% of Indian GDP.
The chemicals sector accounted for about 14% in overall index of industrial production.
Share of industry in national exports was around 11%.
In terms of volume, India is the third-largest producer of chemicals in Asia, after China and Japan.
Despite its large size and significant GDP contribution, Indian chemicals industry represents only around 3% of global chemicals.
In this endeavour you, ladies and gentlemen, have a very important role to play.
As we move forward on the path of high economic growth, growth of sustainable, green solutions in the field of water treatment, food production and healthcare will remain the key challenges.
Chemical engineers will have to contribute in bringing about the necessary advances in food industry, alternative energy systems, semiconductor manufacturing, and environmental modelling and remediation to make our growth sustainable.
These vital areas should be the priority for research and development the field of chemical engineering.
Chemical engineers are known for their resourcefulness given the breadth of their scientific and technical knowledge.
This equips them to take on the challenges, existing and emerging, which confront human society, as it marches ahead.
Let me conclude by leaving a thought with this learned gathering.
The future of your profession hinges to a great extent on the quality of human resources entering it.
If the chemical engineering sector has to flourish in our country, it is essential that the best minds amongst our youth are attracted to this field and they are equipped with latest knowledge and techniques.
I convey my greetings to the organisers, participants and everyone else associated with CHEMCON 2014.
I wish you all success in your deliberations.
I thank you for having invited me.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to have been invited for this ceremony to commemorate the Platinum Jubilee of the Sikh Educational Society.
I congratulate the Sikh Educational Society for completing seventy-five years of valuable service in the field of education.
Running educational institutions, with an enrollment of over ten thousand students and six hundred staff, is no mean achievement.
Providing education for students, irrespective of caste, creed or community, is equally praiseworthy .
The credit for this achievement goes to the visionary founders of the Sikh Educational Society who, as early as 1937, realized the importance of education in nation building and for progress and harmony in society.
Thereafter, generations of teachers, staff, students and management have contributed to the success of the Society’s educational institutions.
Each one of them deserves to be commended for their efforts and contributions.
Education is the most important instrument for social, economic and political transformation.
A well educated population, equipped with the relevant knowledge, attitudes and skills is essential for economic and social development in this century.
Education is the most potent tool for socioeconomic mobility and a key instrument for building an equitable and just society.
Education provides skills and competencies for economic well-being.
Education strengthens democracy by imparting to citizens the tools needed to fully participate in the governance process.
Education also acts as an integrative force in society, imparting values that foster social cohesion and national identity.
We have made significant progress in the field of education since independence.
Literacy levels have gone up from around 11% in 1951 to around 74% in 2011.
Enrolment of Children at primary stage level has reached near universal levels; as youth and adult literacy have reached 91% and 74% respectively.
Equity gap and gender gap in education have also narrowed down.
Today, India has the third largest higher education system in the world.
We have around 652 universities and university level institutes that impart higher and technical education.
They also provide affiliation to more than 33,000 colleges and institutes.
However, our education system, at primary, secondary and tertiary levels, continues to be afflicted with the problems of access, equity and quality.
There is a pressing need to remove barriers to access arising out of social and economic realities, especially for SCs, STs, Muslims, Girls and in civil strife affected areas.
Enrollment rates in our higher education institutions are still well below the world average of 26 per cent.
Wide disparities continue to exist in enrolment percentages among the states and between urban and rural areas.
Disadvantaged sections of society, including SCs, STs, Muslims and women, have significantly lower enrolments than the national average.
Our system turns out nearly seven lakh science and engineering graduates every year.
However, industry surveys show that only 25 percent of these are employable without further training.
Another study shows that only 1 % of the MBA graduates are employable.
In recent years, the massive expansion in enrolment in higher education in the country has resulted in unbearable burden being put on the physical and pedagogic infrastructure of colleges and universities.
Outdated syllabi and sub-standard course content aggravate the situation.
Two areas of particular concern pertain to budgetary allocations to higher education and to research incentives and outputs.
We spend only around 1.2% of our GDP on higher education which is much less than other large developing countries such as Brazil and China.
Quality and quantity of research output in our higher education institutions leaves much to be desired.
The use of technology in higher education remains limited and standards of research and teaching in our universities are below international standards with no Indian university finding a place in the rankings of top 200 institutions globally.
In recent years, private sector initiatives have contributed to the growth of higher education.
Today, around 60% of total enrolments in higher education are in private institutions.
These institutions require an effective regulatory mechanism for quality assessment and regulation.
Given the high importance of education in national development, we have to keep our focus on the expansion of education, on significantly improving the quality of education imparted and on ensuring that educational opportunities are available to all segments of the society.
This has to be a collective effort of the government, the private sector and the civil society.
In the 21st century, a country’s abilities and resources to produce and generate new knowledge would be the only way to place it on top of the global power hierarchy.
Institutions, such as the Sikh Educational Society, have an important role to play in our national efforts to become the premier knowledge economy of the world.
I once again congratulate the Sikh Educational Society on its Platinum Jubilee.
I also convey my warm greetings to the students, teachers and staff of the various educational institutions of the Society and wish them all success in the future.
Jai Hind
I commend the Society for an excellent choice.
Justice Dalveer Bhandari is amongst the illustrious legal luminaries of our country.
His election to the International Court of Justice in 2012 by the UN General Assembly and the UN Security Council is a testimony to his renown as an internationally acclaimed jurist and legal expert.
It is most befitting that Justice Bhandari is getting an award named after late Justice Nagendra Singh, who was himself a distinguished Judge of the International Court of Justice, as well as its President.
Justice Nagendra Singh, in whose memory the International Peace Award has been instituted, was also the founder President of the International goodwill Society.
Justice Bhandari is a deserving torch bearer of Dr. Nagendra Singh’s rich legacy.
Justice Bhandari’s achievements in the field of law and justice are well known to this gathering.
His work, as part of the higher judiciary in our country for over two decades, speaks for itself.
However, few of our judges have had the opportunity to make their mark in the International arena.
Justice Bhandari is amongst the selected few.
His presence on the ICJ is a matter of pride for all of us.
I am confident that Justice Bhandari would continue to serve in the International Court of Justice with great distinction and earn laurels for the country in the field of international law and jurisprudence.
I congratulate him on receiving this well deserved award and I wish him all success in the years ahead.
Jai Hind
I am grateful to the Shibli Academy, and to Professor Zilli, for inviting me today to inaugurate this conference being organised on the centenary of the Darul Musannefin Shibli Academy.
The world in which he lived and worked was a very different one, perhaps beyond our comprehension today.
His great scholarly work, Al Farooq, was translated in many languages.
Underlying the quest for change was a deeper, psychological perception reflective of dispossession.
Their answers varied; the content did not.
Sir Syed established the MAO College at Aligarh.
Maulana Shibli worked with him in this venture for sixteen years.
Though coming from different backgrounds, their views converged on many critical issues but diverged on others.
The Maulana continued his constructive work at Nadwa and finally laid the foundations of this renowned institution devoted to scholarship.
For a century now, the Shibli Academy has contributed to scholarship, particularly in the field of Seerat-un Nabi, early Islamic history, Quraniyaat, Indian history with a focus on the medieval period, and Urdu, Persian and Arabic literature and literary personalities.
The compendium of its publications is impressive, and is a tribute to the past and present scholarship.
Friends This institution, along with some others in the country, has devoted itself specifically to the culture and history of Islam.
India and Indians rightly consider it an essential ingredient of their heritage and an aspect of their multi-dimensional identity.
A pre-requisite for this is education and it is here that we have lagged behind despite frequent and accurate diagnosis time and again.
We have cited tradition and social custom as reasons for this.
We have failed to walk in step with our fellow country men and women.
We have, as a result, exhibited all the signs of social, educational and economic backwardness.
Each of these can be surmounted, given the organisation and the will to succeed.
This is a matter of right, not of charity.
Programmes have been made; the need of the hour is their implementation.
I felicitate the Shibli Academy on its centenary and thank it for inviting me today.
I am confident that having completed a century, it will ‘bat’ even more purposefully in the coming decades.
Jai Hind.
The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) has achieved almost three decades of partnership at the Summit level since the first Summit was held in Dhaka in December 1985.
At the same time, the economic size of South Asia has also witnessed significant expansion.
South Asia was one of the high performing regions of the world during the period from 2003-2010.
Growth has slowed somewhat following the global economic crisis and recession but even then it has remained above the world average.
The leaders of SAARC countries have been continually emphasising the importance of enhancing economic cooperation for regional integration.
At the 17th SAARC Summit, held at Maldives in 2011, South Asian leaders spoke about the need to work on a vision for future development of South Asia, including the goal and elements of a South Asian Economic Union (SAEU).
Intra-regional trade in South Asia has doubled since the region implemented the Agreement on South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA).
The intra-regional exports have increased to about US$ 22 billion in 2013 from US$ 10 billion in 2006 (data source: IMF).
South Asia is expected to achieve substantial tariff reduction by 2016 as SAFTA implementation makes further progress.
This should lead to a greater increase in intra-regional trade.
South Asian countries have taken other steps to increase trade regionally.
India has reduced the sensitive list under SAFTA for LDCs before the scheduled deadline.
Over time, India’s bilateral trade with some of the South Asian countries, like Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan and Nepal, has grown faster than South Asia’s total regional trade during the period 2006 and 2013.
This indicates that South Asia, in parts, is trading more within the region.
There is also a rise in cross-border production networks.
The FTA between India and Sri Lanka has successfully narrowed the trade gap between the two countries.
Varied progress has been made in other areas such as SAARC Agreement on Trade in Services, as also on trade facilitation measures.
Some other major elements that are holding back South Asian integration include high transportation costs, inadequate cross-border infrastructure, and absence of regional transit.
As a result, South Asian goods often lose competitiveness before they can reach world markets.
Intra-regional trade is also inhibited due to limited availability of short term trade finance in the region.
The region needs to strengthen its institutional mechanism to augment short term trade financing to encourage regional trade.
Average time and costs of trading across borders in South Asia is still relatively high in comparison with other developing regions of the world.
Moreover, in South Asia, the costs of trade with countries outside the region appear to be lower than that for carrying out intra-regional trade.
Clearly, a truly integrated region would not be achievable until we overcome these challenges.
Many other issues also come in the way of trade competitiveness and exploitation of trade complementarities in South Asia.
Foremost is the presence of two-fifths of world’s poor in South Asia.
The region is faced with major developmental challenges of poverty, inequality, illiteracy, disease, hunger and homelessness.
South Asia is also vulnerable to major natural disasters such as floods, draughts, cyclones, earthquakes, etc.
An inclusive and stronger regional integration would greatly help in overcoming some of these common challenges.
The overall objective of South Asian Economic Union (SAEU) is to ensure the transformation of South Asia into a peaceful, stable, and prosperous region.
They should, therefore, collectively address the challenges that confront them in the process of regional integration.
While SAEU would require greater regional economic policy coordination, SAARC would benefit from the experiences of other groupings, such as the European Union and ASEAN.
Some prioritised progression may be useful, beginning from completing the on-going trade liberalisation process.
Another priority would be to undertake investment in regional infrastructure, especially transport connectivity that would facilitate ease of travel and trade.
The 18th SAARC Summit later this month will be focussing on ‘Deeper Integration for Peace and Prosperity’.
Building on enhanced connectivity, we need to also encourage proliferation of regional value chains that can pool together competitiveness of each of our economies, at various stages of production.
These would require greater flow of financial capital and intra-regional investments.
An efficient, secure and integrated transport network is essential to support the realisation of South Asian Economic Union.
Regional trade liberalization (for example, SAFTA) alone has not been able to achieve increased intra-regional trade.
Infrastructure development, capacity-building measures, removal of NTBs, and supportive policies and institutions that promote economic activities along identified transport corridors are essential to increase regional trade.
Some of the regional trade facilitation projects may ease the way for an economic union.
Regional institutions like the SAARC Food Bank and SAARC Disaster Management Centre have the potential to help address the common regional challenges.
Proposed institutions such as SAARC Satellite or SAARC Corridor or SAARC Development Bank deserve more attention, as we contemplate moving towards an economic union.
Creation of South Asian Economic Union (SAEU) would prove to be a milestone in regional cooperation efforts.
Most regions in the world are moving towards greater economic integration, as South Asia lags behind.
The logic of economic union lies in re-distribution of common and shared resources within the region in a most efficient and effective manner.
Economic union enhances manifold the bargaining power of member countries in the global arena and helps in realising the full potential of trade complementarities.
The next SAARC Summit will be held in Nepal later this month.
I am sure that the outcomes of this 7th South Asia Economic Summit will provide important policy inputs to the forthcoming SAARC Summit and also guide the regional integration process.
I thank Ambassador Shyam Saran for inviting me and I wish the Conference all success.
Jai Hind !
I am happy to be here today for the inauguration of the 7th Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Scientific Session being held in India for the first time.
I thank Professor Khalilullah for inviting me.
Low-and middle-income countries are disproportionately affected by cardiovascular diseases, with over 80% of deaths in these countries being due to these diseases.
It is estimated that by the year 2030, almost 25 million people will die from cardio-vascular diseases, mainly from heart disease and stroke, which are projected to remain the single leading cause of death.
The situation is no different in India.
Recent studies have shown that heart diseases have emerged as the number one killer in both urban and rural areas of the country.
The diseases affect men and women alike.
If all age groups are included, heart diseases account for about 19 per cent of all deaths in the country.
In this context, I am happy to know that Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society is organizing these conferences regularly in different countries.
The 7th Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society conference is probably the largest of its kind with participation of all the Presidents of major heart rhythm societies in the world.
I convey my best wishes to all the participants and wish them success in their deliberations during this conference in the coming days.
Jai Hind
Much to my regret, I have no access to the cup.
I therefore rest content with normal human capacity to make judgements on the basis of extant knowledge!
The historian Eric Hobsbawm concluded his survey of the twentieth century with the observation that the future cannot be a continuation of the past since a point of crisis has been reached.
Our world, he wrote, ‘risks both implosion and explosion.
It must change.’  Other competent observers have described the past century as a period of metamyths and megadeaths.
Much of this seems to have continued in the first years of the 21st century.
No noticeable change is evident in the nature of challenges and the response patterns.
A prerequisite for any such effort must be an uninhibited inclination for revisiting the fundamentals.
I mention this because at that point of time the various discourses in Muslim societies in the Arab world or elsewhere did not use this term.
Challenges to social peace, in any form, would detract from it.
The external environment and India’s own vision of its role would be of relevance.
India’s own preference, in immediate and medium terms, would be strategic autonomy to create an external environment that is conducive for rapid development.
We would seek mutually beneficial cooperation with all.
Thus the determining factors would be capacity and vision.
Neither can be taken for granted; both can be developed.
Both require a comprehensive approach to national security that goes beyond (but does not exclude) the traditional dimensions and attends in adequate measure to the imperatives of non-traditional security.
It is evident that the goal in any such endeavour should be Human Security that has to be comprehensive and all encompassing rather than selective.
It would of necessity be cooperative rather than competitive.
I do hope your deliberations in the six panels would come forth with perceptions that would enable us to respond meaningfully to this challenge.
Jai Hind.
I thank Swami Chidanand Saraswati ji for inviting me today to this function for the launch of the Encyclopaedia of Hinduism sponsored by the India Heritage Foundation and published last year in the United States.
I felicitate all those who contributed to this momentous project.
An encyclopaedia is to be distinguished from a dictionary.
The latter, however comprehensive, give meanings of words and concepts without a serious effort at integration and depth.
Its contents should also be balanced and capable of intellectual scrutiny.
As a form of compendium of knowledge, encyclopaedias have a history of their own and their origin has been traced back to early history.
They should be distinguished from Universal histories penned by ancient and medieval historians.
The first edition of Encyclopaedia Britannica surfaced in 1768-1771.
It was preceded by similar works in French and German.
The process gathered pace at the beginning of the twentieth century.
A Jewish Encyclopaedia in 12 volumes was published between 1901 and 1906.
The Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, also in 12 volumes, was published between 1908 and 1927.
The Encyclopaedia of Social Sciences was published in 1930-1935.
It ceased publication after its 16th edition in 1967 and has now been replaced by the International Encyclopaedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences.
The first edition of the Encyclopaedia of Islam in five volumes was published between 1913 and 1938.
Its second edition in 12 volumes was completed between 1954 and 2005.
A third edition is now underway.
An Encyclopaedia Judaica was published in 1972 and revised in 2006.
It was, according to an editorial note, reflective of a political orientation.
15 volumes of Encyclopaedia Iranica have been published; 30 more are in different stages of completion.
Most of these are now also available on-line.
In the world of today, the need for such collections of knowledge on a full range of subjects is evident.
Available evidence shows that the encyclopaedia “industry” is now flourishing.
One count puts the figure of these in the market at anything between six and ten thousand.
At this rate, there may even be a need for an encyclopaedia of encyclopaedias!
Allow me to mention a specific feature of the publication before us.
The selection of entries on different concepts, religious and philosophical streams, identities of geographical and historical significance, is comprehensive.
There is, in addition, a conflation of India as a country of great antiquity and Hinduism as an ancient and universal faith having its own philosophy, practices and rituals.
Each of these, in the context of a segment of the Indian community in the United States, is understandable.
Due care, presumably, has been taken to ensure that the standards applicable to contemporary disciplines in the domain of social sciences have been maintained.
Knowledge, as we know, is dynamic and not static.
Thrice in a century has been cited as a thumb-rule.
This test, I am confident, will be applied to future editions of this otherwise excellent compilation.
I thank Swami ji for inviting me today.
Jai Hind.
Some Thoughts on the World of Tomorrow I am happy to be in this enchanting city and grateful to the Rector and the faculty of the Yerevan State University for inviting me today.
I have come to a land some distance from India but not far from the individual and collective memory of Indians.
I myself was born in Calcutta (now Kolkata), and spent many years in the city.
Amongst its historic features are Armenian churches and other signs of its Armenian inhabitants.
Father Michael Chamich’s History of Armenia was translated and published in Calcutta in 1827.
More recently, historians like Mesrovb Jacob Seth and George Bournoutian have recorded the Armenian contribution in India to trade and commerce as to various cultural and charitable activities.
It is thus evident that well before modern times; the flow of people, trade and ideas was not an unusual occurrence.
My purpose today, however, is to talk about the future, not the past.
Nor was the crisis limited to matters strategic and financial.
The conclusion is unavoidable that individuals, societies, and the global community as a collective, need to re-think the parameters of their future.
The devil, as always, is in details.
The right to live, universally conceded as a basic human right, implies the right to breathe, to food and water, to health.
These, together, necessitate sustainable development and the need to address the totality of challenges of climate change.
Alongside are the problems of population, disease, energy and resources.
These emerging imperatives have two-fold implications: technological and socio-political.
Today, more than ever before, there is a general realization in all societies that solutions have to be sought through science and technology.
The prospects are fascinating in some respects, disturbing in others.
All of these have geopolitical implications in the future.
Allow me to dilate on the implications of some of these.
Human civilization, as it has developed, is energy-centric and newer technologies would increase our demands of energy.
The 20th century was the century of hydrocarbons.
The big shock to the energy industry came with ‘fracking’, a new set of techniques and technologies for extracting more hydrocarbons from the ground.
Though there are concerns about environmental damage, these increased the outputs of oil and gas, caused the usurpation of old-line coal-fired power plants, and dramatically reduced dependence of some countries on foreign oil.
The demand for clean energy is growing.
Solar and wind are now advancing on an exponential curves.
Every two years, for example, solar installation rates are doubling, and photovoltaic-module costs are falling by about 20 percent.
Even without the subsidies that governments are phasing out, present costs of solar installations will, by 2022, halve, reducing returns on investments, to less than four years.
A tantalizing prospect emerged when men of science looked beyond the planet Earth.
As futurist Ray Kurzweil says, when an exponential technology is at one percent, you are halfway to 100 percent, and that is where solar and wind energies are now.
This will have a cascading impact on the regional security architectures in many parts of the world as well as pan-global ramifications.
Cyber technology has overwhelmed us and its impact on every level of human organization is evident.
Foxconn has already announced that it would replace most of its workers with robots.
Robots are also uniformly productive irrespective of geography.
As manufacturing centres will shift closer to consumption centres, the geostrategic significance of trade routes and demand for transportation will also diminish.
It will also drive down commodity and energy prices, and could result in destabilization of some economies.
This can have a cascading effect, as strong, global deflationary force will impact all economies.
Some governments may attempt to impose reactionary Protectionism.
Technological developments will have a deep impact on the socio-economic structure of society.
Greater automation can free a larger number of people from the drudgery of repetitive tasks, providing more leisure.
On the other hand, more leisure can also lead to greater hedonism and pursuit of more selfish goals.
To ensure that humanity treads the path of positive, we may require a universal set of values and belief system.
Yet, others are not far behind.
The Economist magazine indicated last month that in the field of quantum computing and quantum cryptography, the list of patent pending applications is headed by China, not the United Sates.
Economic historians have also drawn attention to the fact that in the span of world history, the distinction between industrialized and developing countries, or rich and poor countries, is relatively recent.
It is not a constant and has been changing in recent decades.
Technology and its applications is one aspect of the matter; the human response to it is another.
At the same time, it is evident that the impact of new techniques and technologies would not be uniform in all societies since they are at different levels of development and do not have equal capacities of absorption.
Only then would actions of countries be harmonized in the attainment of common ends.
It is a distant horizon towards which we must continue to walk.
As young people, you have the will and capacity to do so, for your own good and for humanity at large.
I thank the Indian Institute of Dalit Studies for inviting me today.
I congratulate the Institute on the important occasion of its decennial.
This institution was set up with the goal of undertaking serious research and analyses on issues related to the deprived and marginalised sections of our society, such as Dalits, Tribals, Nomadic and De-notified Tribes, religious minorities, differently-abled persons and women.
It has over the years done good work.
Empirical data shows that this disparity is closely linked with group identity associated with social origin, such as caste, ethnicity, religion, gender and disability.
As a result, citizens belonging to the scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, religious minorities and women have suffered discrimination and social exclusion due to their social identity.
The tribals endure both physical and social isolation.
Women who constitute half the population face prejudice, although its nature and form varies according to their caste, ethnicity, and religious backgrounds.
This signifies the magnitude of the challenge and the importance of addressing it.
In 1947, our founding fathers were cognisant of the dimensions of the problem.
The citizens gave the Constitution to themselves in the expectation that its instrumentalities would help secure the objectives.
They recognised group identities and the disparities amongst them; they also prescribed methodologies for addressing them.
Similar laws were passed for other vulnerable groups such as women and religious minorities.
Other steps to bridge the gap between these marginalised groups and the rest of the population have been taken.
Our developmental experience, since independence, shows that there has been a significant improvement in the living standards of our people, including the marginalised groups.
Poverty, an important indicator, has declined in rural and urban areas and across social, religious and economic groups, especially in the last 20 years.
Despite these overall positive changes, the outcomes of our developmental agenda have been uneven across social, religious and economic groups.
These groups have generally improved their situation, but at a slower rate compared to the others.
As a result, disparities between these vulnerable groups and other sections of our population, still persists.
The SCs/STs, the Muslims, and women lag behind when compared with the rest.
It is evident that disadvantaged social and religious groups such as SCs, STs, Muslims and women lag behind in human development indicators such as poverty, education, civic amenities, employment, and political participation.
The aforementioned indicators are quantifiable.
However, there are other aspects of inequality and exclusion, especially in rural areas, which are not so visible, but are equally unjust and hurtful.
Lack of awareness amongst the beneficiaries and less than satisfactory implementation of myriad welfare programmes and schemes for the marginalised groups have been the main shortcomings in our efforts to mainstream these groups and have them taste, in full measure, the fruits of rapid economic growth and development.
Building a just and inclusive socio-economic order is a necessary condition for sustained peace, harmony and progress in our society.
It is also a moral imperative for all of us as human beings.
It would require social and economic empowerment of the marginalised groups and their adequate participation in decision-making.
I wish you success in your endeavours.
Jai Hind
I am happy to be here today for the valedictory of the centenary celebrations of the Catholic Association of South Kanara (CASK).
I thank my friend and colleague Ambassador Eric Gonslaves for having invited me for this important occasion.
I understand that the Association has provided valued services to the people in the field of health and education, especially to the deprived and marginalised sections of society, irrespective of religion, caste or creed.
It has also focussed on supporting the local culture, including Konkani language and literature, music and fine arts.
Our land is blessed to have almost all the great religions, coexisting peacefully and prospering here, for centuries.
Christianity is one of the great religions of the world.
We received its divine message in 52 AD when the Apostle St Thomas is believed to have landed in the Malabar coast.
Since then, the Catholic community in India has been an important part of our country’s social mosaic.
Members of the community are fully integrated in the national mainstream.
They have served the nation with great distinction in every sphere of life.
The Christian faith has strengthened our secular fabric and enriched our composite Indian identity.
The contribution of the Christian church in social and charitable work in our country, especially in education and health sectors, has been particularly noteworthy.
The CASK has carried forward the rich legacy of selfless public service inspired by the message of Jesus Christ who over two thousand years ago spread the truth of fundamental unity of mankind and preached the cherished human values of love, compassion, forgiveness and charity.
It is for this message that Mahatma Gandhi called Jesus Christ the greatest teacher humanity has ever had.
I applaud the CASK for the outstanding work over the last century.
I am sanguine that it will continue on the same path of selfless service for the next hundred years and beyond.
Our country faces many challenges, of which none is bigger than poverty and unemployment.
The CASK could look into expanding its areas of work from health and education to skill development and employment generation.
On this happy occasion, I convey my heartiest congratulations to the Patron of CASK – His Lordship Aloysius Paul D’Souza, the current President, other Office bearers and Members of the Association.
I salute the Founders and all those who have nurtured the Association over the past 100 years.
I once again thank Ambassador Gonsalves and the Organisers for having invited me.
I wish the Association many more years of fruitful work and contribution in the service of the people and betterment of our society.
Jai Hind.
I thank the Institute of Foreign Policy Studies, University of Calcutta, for inviting me today to inaugurate this seminar and commend the organizers for choosing a weighty and relevant theme.
The distinguished participants would perhaps have noted this city’s own linkages to Europe over the past three centuries.
Some facts bear reiteration.
The Eurasian landmass, historically considered as two continents, represents over 60% of the world's population, 52% of the global GDP and close to 70% of world trade.
The story of their interaction has deep roots in recorded history.
Europe was for long familiar with Asian lands, Asian military prowess and grandeur of Asian empires, Asian manufactures, and expensive Asian exotica.
It was an acquaintance of unequals.
The principal objective at that stage was disruption of the monopoly of spice trade in Asian hands.
In subsequent centuries, other European powers joined the race for Asian trade; this continued till the end of the 18th century when naked colonialism took over from trading companies.
The global political balance began to change in the second half of the 20th century and with it the economic imbalance inherited from the age of imperialism.
In recent decades, both Asia and Europe have undergone momentous political, economic and social changes.
The process continues and new equations are emerging in economics and strategy.
The direction and pace of these developments would be critical determinants in shaping the future.
It is, therefore, important that we understand better the internal and external dynamics in the two continents, the challenges and opportunities that confront them, and together chart a viable course of mutually beneficial cooperation not just for Asia and Europe, but for the entire world.
II The historian Niall Ferguson has identified six qualities that contributed to the rise of the West, namely competition, science, property rights, medicine, consumer society and work ethic.
These are no longer a monopoly of the West and have been imbibed in varying measure by many societies in Asia.
The Asian success models – Japan, China, the Asian Tigers, India in some measure, demonstrate this clearly.
According to an Asian Development Bank study, if Asia’s current rate of economic growth continues, by 2050, it would account for around half of the global product output, trade and investment.
This audience knows too well the complexities that characterize the local and regional scenes in our two continents.
Most Asian countries also face the overarching challenge of governance and institutional capacity.
The interdependence among rising and traditional powers, regional and global powers, and among rising powers themselves, may also hasten or delay in the ushering of the Asian century.
Nevertheless, the economic dynamism of Asia is bringing the economic hegemony of the West to an end.
It has created some anxiety in the West, including in Europe, about the political implications of the loss of economic dominance.
There is apprehension that Europe is going to wind up on the loser's side of globalization.
Europe’s problems of economic slowdown, high unemployment, a debt crisis, and financial paralysis gives rise to the view that the continent’s future is dim, if urgent correctives are not forthcoming.
A declining population and reduction in a productive work force can in the long term present challenges.
Add to this Europe’s energy dependency, lack of natural resources and declining military clout.
European societies have not been very successful in integrating their minority groups and immigrants whose presence in the workforce is seen as essential.
Despite these, Europe and particularly the European Union remains an important player in global affairs.
The EU is the largest economy and the largest trading block in the world.
Its 28 members account for 16% of world imports and exports.
The EU is the world’s largest trader of manufactured goods and services.
It ranks first in both inbound and outbound international investments.
UK, France and Germany also wield significant political and military clout in international affairs, the first two being permanent members of the UN Security Council.
The NATO, backed by US military might, remains world’s most powerful politico-military alliance.
Thus located, Europe and an emerging Asia are not necessarily involved in a zero-sum game.
The relationship between the two continents in the 21st Century will have to be one of an equal partnership for global peace, security and prosperity.
Asia needs technology and specialized skills; Europe needs markets, workforce and investments.
Getting its relations right with the diverse and dynamic Asian region is one of the major challenges facing Europe.
In these, development cooperation is high on the European agenda.
Asia-Europe economic interdependence has grown.
With total Asia-Europe trade in 2012 estimated at 1.37 trillion Euros, Asia has become the European Union’s main trading partner, accounting for one-third of total trade.
India and EU are two of the world’s largest democracies that share common values.
India is therefore committed to working with the European Union as a reliable partner to contribute to world peace, stability and security.
III It goes without saying that the world today is an interdependent one.
Nations cannot live in isolation.
Interaction and cooperation is a dire necessity.
Equity and equitable benefit is a pre-requisite for such cooperation.
It is broadly representative of many of the issues on the bilateral agenda of the participants.
Amidst the questions of concern on ASEM’s agenda, those pertaining to Non-Traditional Security Challenges deserve particular attention.
The documents list terrorism, drug trafficking, money laundering and cyber crimes amongst them along with climate change, cooperation in disaster risk reduction, food, water and energy security.
A more specific threat is of pandemics.
The ambit of these challenges can perhaps be enlarged to cover all threats to human security that allows people to exercise their options and choices safely and freely with regard to developmental goals.
It goes beyond governmental efforts, involve civil society and eventually become a movement for justice.
There are other ingredients of human security that have political overtones that impede or prevent governmental solutions.
I refer to human freedoms and human rights.
Prescriptive models are unlikely to be welcomed.
For this reason, conclaves such as today’s remain integral to the effort.
I wish you all success in your deliberations.
I thank Professor Suranjan Das for inviting me.
The occasion itself, to inaugurate a seminar on Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, was a compelling incentive.
That iconic personality, and his association with Kolkata, is known to this audience and in no need of commentary.
The tribute paid to him by Jawaharlal Nehru in Lok Sabha on February 24 1958 will unquestionably stand scrutiny for all times.
Eminent speakers before me have dwelt at length on various aspects of Maulana Azad’s ideals and their relevance today.
These ideas and ideals were the building blocks of our polity.
They cannot be forsaken without damaging the multi-dimensional structure.
Our commitment to uphold them must be reiterated unambiguously.
'Steadfastness in adherence to the ideals of the freedom struggle was one, albeit principal, aspect of Maulana Azad’s work.
These were neglected, even distorted, in the colonial period and stood in dire need of a corrective.
The creation of the Indian Council for Cultural Relations was his chosen instrumentality.
Inaugurating this body in April 1950, he recognised the need to proceed step by step and focused on the immediate neighbourhood to the west and the east of India.
In this, he dwelt on ‘the special relations’ that India and Iran have always had with each other.
His familiarity with Persian literature is amply reflected in his writings.
Friendship, it is said, is a slow ripening fruit that requires careful tending.
This is as true of individuals as of nations.
It also holds good for the Indo-Iranian relationship.
For this reason, I propose today to mention some aspects of it.
The Iran Society, Kolkata, has over decades dedicated itself to the language and literature of Iran.
Scholarship has dilated on the affinities between Avastan or Old Persian and Vedic Sanskrit.
Words of Sanskrit origin have been located in Shahnamah.
Maulana Azad identified Dhul Qarnain, mentioned in the Qur’an, with Cyrus the Great.
Professor Juan Cole has opined that at the peak of the Moghul-Safavid period, there were perhaps seven times more readers of Persian in India than in Iran.
The qand-e-parsi did indeed reach all parts of India and left its mark on many of our languages.
The first newspaper in Persian language anywhere in the world was published in Calcutta in 1823 by Raja Ram Mohun Roy of Brahmo Samaj.
India traditionally loomed large in perceptions of various segments of the Iranian public.
Their accounts were eagerly sought.
Some of these also reflect negative perceptions.
A perennial subject of interest was religion and philosophy; a modern day instance of it is Ali Asghar Hikmat’s ode to Konarak.
The impact of association is evident in languages.
Contemporary Bangla has many words that have their origin in Persian.
I recently chanced upon a book that traced to Persian some of the grammatical and structural peculiarities of Marathi.
These instances can be multiplied.
Both history and culture testify to this and it would be no exaggeration to depict the two as civilisational cousins.
The painting also depicts a lion and a lamb at the feet of the two kings.
They symbolise peace and harmony.
As an Iranian scholar put it a few years, shared history and culture do not automatically translate into strong relations.
The contemporary history of this relationship can be viewed period-wise or theme-wise.
It was principally determined by the Cold War considerations and Iran’s membership of military pacts and alliances of that period.
Close proximity to Pakistan was a logical consequence.
Despite this, some commercial relations and bilateral projects were initiated.
Iran maintained nuanced neutrality in the Bangladesh conflict of 1971 but thereafter developed good political and commercial relations with India in the 1973-1978 years.
These were sustained, with some hiccups, in the post- Revolution years.
India retained a carefully balanced position in the long Iran – Iraq War.
Strains in relations developed in 1990-91 due to Iranian pronouncements on Jammu and Kashmir.
Thereafter, concerted efforts were made to improve relations.
Its first results were in evidence in the Indo-Pak confrontation in Geneva in 1994 on human rights issues relating to J&K.
Prime Minister Narasimha Rao’s visit to Iran in 1993 and President Hashemi Rafsanjani’s visit to India in 1995 stabilised the relationship.
It received an impetus when President Khatemi was received as the chief guest for the Republic Day 2003.
This expectation of closer cooperation for regional stability was belied by other impulses and imperatives that came to the fore.
Both seek rapid economic and technological advancement in order to move up the scale of development for the benefit of their people.
Both are endowed with adequate technology-savvy human resources in the younger age groups.
As a logical corollary and in order to attain national objectives, both seek peace and stability in their neighbourhood, in their common region, and in the world.
Both have experienced the scourge of terrorism and desire an end to it.
Both seek freedom of the seas for trade.
Both desire autonomy of decision-making and resent external interference in it.
Both have sought to develop a sharper focus on areas of cooperation for mutual benefit.
Iran’s location and hydrocarbon resources complement India’s energy appetite and quest for new markets.
Needless to say, divergence of perceptions would arise at times and challenge our ability to work together, handle differences and compete and cooperate at the same time.
III Iran has been called an Empire of the Mind but one replete with many paradoxes, and contradictions.
Herodotus considered Persians the best informed in history.
A statement of the Prophet has been cited by the redoubtable Ibn Khaldun in the Muqaddimah: “If scholarship hung suspended in the highest parts of the heaven, the Persians would attain it.” All this adds up to a fascinating people, culture and country in our neighbourhood.
In geo-political and economic terms, Iran has played and will continue to play a significant role in human affairs.
India’s own capabilities in each of the potential areas of cooperation would ensure equitable gains.
As so often in life, a maxim of Sheikh Saadi is of relevance: Have patience.
All things are difficult before they become easy.
I wish it all success in its work.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to have been invited for the inauguration of the 89th Foundation Course at the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration, here in Mussoorie.
Their memory lingers.
The joy of visiting the Academy is enhanced by this opportunity to interact with young persons who are about to embark on their own careers in civil services.
They do so in exciting times when the world is changing, India is changing, the tasks and challenges are changing.
They will have a role to play in shaping a future that is itself in flux.
The honour is bestowed on the select few only.
Your journey has just begun, and is a long one.
With this authority comes a huge responsibility.
Government is a steward of public good.
It articulates priorities based on the needs of the people, translates them into policies and implements programmes based on those policies, so that lives of the people improve continuously.
These priorities, policies and programmes change with the changing aspirations and requirements of the people, to which the government and civil service has to adjust accordingly.
In this overarching philosophy of governance and public administration, the civil service becomes the principal vehicle for delivery of public goods and services to the people.
A politically neutral but committed to public service bureaucracy is thus a sine qua non for the smooth functioning of a democratic government, such as ours.
Additionally and in our times, the bureaucracy has another important role, that of a bridge between the people and their elected representatives.
The civil servant is expected to faithfully implement the directions of the duly elected government.
Allow me to dwell on some harsh truths.
While much has been achieved by us as a people in the decades of independence, the fruits of development have reached the public unevenly.
We still have starvation deaths, which exist with high levels of malnutrition and under-nutrition.
Widespread poverty and unemployment are reality.
So is the lack of basic civic amenities, such as healthcare, education, water-supply, sanitation, transport and communication.
India ranks 135 out of 187 countries on the UNDP’s Human Development Index.
This is compounded by existence of the social discrimination and inequality based on caste, religion or region.
Each of these derogates from the ideals of justice, equality and fraternity.
This does not mean that successive governments and generations of civil servants in independent India have not tried to address the maladies that afflict our economy and society.
Large investments have been made in social and physical infrastructure.
Programmes aimed at poverty alleviation, employment generation, literacy, food security, healthcare and shelter have been launched.
Subsidies for food, energy and agricultural inputs have been provided at a heavy cost to the exchequer.
Nevertheless, the outcomes of these programmes could have been better.
Besides the magnitude and complexity of our developmental challenges, poor programme implementation or leakages in the public services delivery has been diagnosed reasons for our underachievement in the development agenda.
The figures of leakage and wastage of resources are astronomical.
As functionaries of the state you must always remember that the emancipation of the deprived and marginalised sections of our society is a special responsibility.
Unless they are uplifted, we can never emerge as a strong and prosperous nation.
All this has gone hand in hand with demands and expectations that have undergone significant change.
We now have an aspirational India, impatient to taste in greater measure the fruits of economic prosperity and social progress, and as a matter of right.
Our citizens today seek governance which is efficient, transparent, honest and responsive.
There is a sense of urgency in the demand and lesser inclination for patience and forgiveness.
Your capacity to perform will therefore depend largely on your ability to evoke public confidence.
In recent times, public cynicism towards government and its functionaries has multiplied.
Each one of us in public life has a responsibility to address this scourge by setting impeccable standards of integrity and exemplary behaviour.
Policy, ultimately, is implementation.
It is what happens that counts.
If policies are not translated into specific programmes, which are in turn are not well implemented, failure is logical.
A dynamic civil service, ready to adapt to the changing needs and aspirations of our citizens, is thus an imperative necessity.
Do not become hostage to special interest groups.
Do not give in to extraneous pressures in discharge of your duties.
Do not seek patrons.
This approach will make you better officers, but more importantly, even better human beings.
Friends Our country is emerging as an important player on the world stage.
Our political and economic weight in a globalised world is increasing.
You, as members of the higher civil service, would have to continuously enhance your skills and upgrade your knowledge, in order to remain globally competitive.
You must strive for training and specialization, as well as use of modern technology in your work, but you must remain sensitive to the welfare of ordinary Indians.
I wish you success and satisfaction.
I thank the Director for having invited me.
Jai Hind.
Each of these requires the ability to advocate one’s viewpoint cogently.
Each requires knowledge of the subject and an ability to present it succinctly.
A great debater has the capacity to touch the audience emotionally and possibly even bring about a change of mind.
Yet each is unique in regard to background, experience, oratorical skill, persuasive methodology.
Together, they are studies in contrast.
I congratulate Arun Jaitley ji, Karan Singh ji and Sharad Yadav ji on the recognition bestowed on them today.
Jai Hind.
Calibrated Futurology: India, China and the World The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences has a name and fame and I deem it a privilege to be invited to address it today.
I venture to think that the theme is of considerable relevance to the world of today, and of tomorrow.
I begin with a confession.
I am a stranger to China and know but little directly about the land and its people.
And yet, is there anyone in my country who does not know something of a great neighbour?
Many of my generation also followed closely the happenings in the post-revolution period.
Evidence of cultural interaction over millennia is scattered in our two lands, is recorded in travelogues and mentioned in history textbooks.
A Chinese scholar familiar with the India-China relationship in a wider perspective has characterised it as a three part saga.
We need to identify and work harder on synergies; we must also be driven by the imperative to locate and eliminate areas of disharmony.
Both compel us to go beyond the obvious and paint on a wider canvass.
II The primary goal of this Academy, I am given to understand, is to invigorate the nation through the development of social sciences.
These frameworks, needless to say, rarely remain immutable and respond to the imperatives of change.
The social scientist, therefore, carries both the responsibility of studying change and of crafting timely responses to it.
While the mind of the social scientist is riveted on ground reality, his vision is focused on the horizon that is ever receding.
My purpose today is to address both aspects of this endeavour.
I begin with social imperatives.
These emanate from the level of development of our respective societies.
The period of imperial or colonial dominance damaged our economies, distorted social structures, disrupted lines of trade and cultural communications, disregarded affinities and synergies.
As a result, and despite considerable progress, both our societies continue to be in Medium Human Development category of UNDP’s Human Development Index, with China’s global rank being 101 and India’s 136.
Both would require a carefully crafted strategy for management of resources, demographics, inclusiveness, rural-urban balance, energy security, environmental sustainability and above all a sustained period of peace and stability conducive to economic and social development.
No less relevant is the imperative of cooperation.
We live in a globalised world that is ever shrinking in perception, and reality, thanks to newer technologies.
We also live in a world of nation-states which tend to be driven by Westphalian impulses.
Seven billion people inhabit the globe today.
This number was 5.2 billion in 1990 and will increase to 8 billion by 2025.
China and India together account for about 37 percent of world’s population and are two of the largest developing countries in the world.
This proportion is unlikely to change in the coming decades.
There has always been, and will probably continue to be, a competition for resources.
It is here that we come to appreciate the relevance and utility of the Five Principles of Panchsheel whose 60th anniversary China, India and Myanmar came together to celebrate.
These principles enunciate the basic guidelines for the establishment of a new international political and economic order.
An iconic personality of the 20th century had prescribed a litmus test for such situations.
Allow me to recall it: discover truth through practice, and through practice verify and develop truth.
It is thus relevant to ask how far these principles have been implemented in India-China relations in the past six decades.
The border clash of 1962 left a scar on the Indian psyche and led to a brief interregnum in the growth of ties.
Both countries renewed high-level exchanges in the late 1970s.
These paved way for expanding cooperation in the fields of trade, economy, culture and people-to-people exchanges.
The last two decades have witnessed rapid growth in our relations in all fields.
We have managed to handle difficult and complex issues successfully and have not allowed them to affect the overall relationship.
The momentum of high level political exchanges has been maintained.
Our bilateral trade has increased more than twenty times in the last decade.
In the defence and security field, the growing cooperation between the armed forces has helped in building mutual trust.
Both countries have taken initiatives in the field of culture to enhance mutual understanding.
I had the privilege today to jointly release with His Excellency Vice President Li Yuanchao, the India-China Encyclopedia of Cultural Contacts.
It is a significant contribution to the literature on the subject and I congratulate scholars for doing an outstanding job.
Both India and China have been focusing on domestic development and economic growth.
China started its reform and opening up a decade before India did in the early 1990s.
Rapid economic growth in the last few decades has brought about a socio-economic transformation in both societies.
We need to harness our complementarities and synergies in the areas of economy and business.
India’s growing consumer market, skilled human resources, and software excellence combined with China’s own large market, its manufacturing prowess and cost competitiveness provide the platform for exponential growth in our economic ties.
We should set an ambitious trade target and work assiduously towards its realization.
The imbalance in trade needs to be corrected.
These and other issues are being addressed in the Strategic Economic Dialogue that began two years back.
To this end, we need a comprehensive broad based dialogue at all levels of the government, intelligentsia, business, media and the worlds of arts and culture.
I am told that a project to translate Chinese classics in Indian languages and Indian literature into Chinese is being undertaken.
This is a good beginning; more such initiatives would be helpful.
So would availability of literature on each other’s developmental experience.
III The road map for the future of our relations has been carefully crafted.
Both our countries hold similar positions on issues such as climate change, Doha round, reform of international financial institutions, and energy security.
We also coordinate our positions before major multilateral events.
It is important that we continue to do so since these pose common challenges.
Overall, I feel that India-China relations are at a stage where with the active efforts of all stakeholders we can take them to a new level.
Further promoting our ties with China is one of the priorities of India’s foreign policy and there is consensus across the political spectrum on this issue.
India has recently undertaken a mammoth democratic exercise, in which over 500 million voters have elected a new Central Government.
For the first time in 30 years, a single political party has obtained parliamentary majority on its own.
Despite this change, there will be continuity in foreign policy.
Let me say a few words on the basic principles of India’s foreign policy and how they are applied to India-China relations.
India has always followed an independent and autonomous foreign policy.
This has enabled us to pursue mutually beneficial cooperation with all major countries in the world.
India’s domestic and foreign policy priorities are inter-linked.
We do not subscribe to alliance building nor do we believe in the logic of containment.
Building peaceful and cooperative relationships in our neighborhood is an intrinsic element of our foreign policy.
In the peripheries that we share in Central Asia, West Asia, South East Asia and the maritime space from the Indian Ocean to the Western Pacific, there are both convergences and divergences between India and China.
The challenge here is to our ability to work together, handle differences and compete and cooperate at the same time.
Our destinies are linked by geography and history.
We welcome China’s peaceful development and regard it as a mutually reinforcing process.
There is enough space in the world for the development of India and China, and the world needs the common development of both countries.
As two large developing countries, our common interests far outweigh our differences.
We admire China achievements in terms of development and hope to see China become a developed country soon.
Our relationship today has transcended bilateral scope and acquired regional, global and strategic significance.
We both view each other as partners for mutual benefit and not as rivals or competitors.
It has been customary to focus on bilateral issues although both are nations face similar global challenges today.
Our primary interest is to pay attention to the task of development.
For it to succeed, both countries need a peaceful periphery and an environment of tranquility.
And thus it has been the objective of both our countries to seek tranquillity and stability in our immediate neighbourhood and extended region.
Only then can we bring prosperity and stability to Asia and the world.
We must adhere to this principle in future negotiations.
As two populous and fast developing nations, food and energy security are of vital concern to both out countries.
We need to find ways of cooperating in clean energy technologies and also sharing experience in managing our respective food economy.
Terrorism continues to be the greatest threat to our development goals.
We need to find ways to jointly tackle this scourge.
In the years ahead, we see a trend of multi-polarity emerging in the global political landscape and feel that India and China should cooperate for mutual benefit in this evolving and developing framework.
We are also seeing the gravity of world economy shifting towards Asia.
The responsibility for taking our bilateral relations to new heights is a shared one.
I thank you for inviting me today.
I wish you success for the good of our two people.
This is a very special occasion and I am happy to be here today to commemorate the 60th Anniversary of Panchsheel or Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence.
I congratulate our gracious host, President Xi Jinping, for this initiative.
President Thein Sein is a neighbour of India and China.
His presence adds aura to this august gathering.
I convey my best wishes to him and to the friendly people of Myanmar on this important occasion.
I felicitate the Chinese People’s Institute of Foreign Affairs and the participants in today’s Symposium on the Five Principles.
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, Pursuit of world peace is a fundamental tenet of India’s foreign policy.
It draws inspiration from our ancient civilisational value of considering the world as one family.
This shapes and guides our actions in international relations.
Even before India became an independent nation, the leaders of our freedom struggle had outlined the fundamental precepts and values that embody the Five Principles of Peaceful Existence or Panchsheel.
The Constitution of India enjoins the State to endeavour to promote international peace and security and to maintain just and honourable relations between nations.
Speaking in our Parliament Prime Minister Nehru had referred to Lord Buddha’s use of Panchsheel as a moral concept and had welcomed it.
In Myanmar, Panchsheel has deep roots in its Buddhist traditions.
In China, Confucius had emphasised harmony in the midst of differences.
It is thus evident that Panchsheel emanated from the civilizational matrix of Asia and is Asia’s contribution towards building a just and democratic international order.
Panchsheel came to be accepted almost universally by countries and finally by the United Nations in the conduct of international relations.
UN Secretary General Dag Hammarskjold described them as ‘a reaffirmation of the obligations and aims of the UN’.
During the visit of Premier Li Keqiang to India in May 2013, India and China decided to mark the 60th anniversary of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence in 2014 by designating it as the "Year of Friendly Exchanges".
It was my privilege to have formally launched the “Year of India-China Friendly Exchanges” in New Delhi in February this year.
I am confident that various programmes under the Year of Friendly Exchanges will help forge a closer and stronger relationship between India and China.
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, India and China are ancient civilizations.
We are neighbours.
We are strategic partners.
The imperatives of the 21st century propel us towards a better understanding of each other’s objectives and more purposeful cooperation for mutual benefit.
Greater interaction between the people of our two countries, in all fields, is a necessary condition for stronger overall bilateral relations.
India-Myanmar relations are rooted in our shared historical, ethnic, cultural and religious ties.
A significant population of Indian origin resides in Myanmar.
Our shared history and common interests paves the way for greater mutually beneficial cooperation.
Panchsheel is the basis of such a world order.
We need a new paradigm for global action.
Our destinies are intertwined.
Our quest is, should be, for a framework in which opportunities and challenges for the betterment of our societies co-exist.
India, China and Myanmar are bound by age old linkages and geography.
We may be at different stages of development but we can learn from each other’s national experiences.
In our respective bilateral relations, our common interests far outweigh our differences.
Panchsheel can help us exploit this potential for cooperation and come up with fresh, innovative initiatives to improve the lives of our people.
On the global level, Panchsheel preserves the right of all nations to choose their own path while interacting with others on the basis of mutual respect and equality.
Panchsheel provides the framework within which a just and equitable global order can be achieved to the satisfaction and benefit of all.
We gather here today to reaffirm the timeless relevance of Panchsheel in establishing a peaceful, stable, prosperous and secure world.
I convey my best wishes for the success of the 60th Anniversary of Panchsheel and the Year of India – China Friendly Exchanges.
I thank the Chinese People’s Institute of Foreign Affairs for hosting us.
Thank you.
Abbas lived and worked at a critical period in the history of modern India.
Thus it would suffice to say that Khwaja Ahmad Abbas’s genes exhibited scholarly traditions worthy of citation in any company.
He took this to heart and described his relationship with Nehru as “a long love affair”.
Abbas, in his own words, was “a communicator of ideas”.
He did this as a journalist, short story writer, a novelist, a film critic and film script writer.
He is considered one of the pioneers of Indian parallel or neo-realistic cinema having penned films like Neecha Nagar, Jagte Raho, Dharti Ke Lal, Awara, Shri 420, Mera Naam Joker, Bobby and Henna.
As a journalist, his columns ‘Last Page’ and ‘Azad Qalam’ commenced in 1935 in Bombay Chronicle and continued in Blitz till his death in 1987.
His retort in early 1963 to US Senator Richard Russell’s uncharitable criticism of India was characteristic of his passion for causes Indian.
A 16 minute documentary film made by Khwaja Ahmad Abbas in 1968 added a footnote to our legal history.
Titled A Tale of Four Cities, it contrasted the life of luxury of the rich in Calcutta, Bombay, Madras and Delhi, with the squalor and poverty of the poor.
Particularly the life of those whose hands and labour helped to build beautiful cities, factories and other industrial complexes.
The documentary was silent except for a song which the labourers sang while at work.
The Bench, headed by Chief Justice Hidayatullah, allowed the petition on the ground that treatment of motion pictures must be different from other forms of art and expression.
In your heart there is no room for prejudice.
They are reflective of his social awareness.
If you are not allergic to yellowing news-print then go to library and read any of the hundreds of columns I have written.
The improvement of man, I think, is the greatest mission of a writer, or an intellectual or a creative artist.
In each of these fields, his contribution was seminal.
His work reflected his deep commitment to the ideals of socialism, secularism and nationalism.
Through the medium of cinema, he highlighted relevant social and political issues of the day, such as poverty, communalism, casteism and the rural-urban divide.
His work remains one amongst the most impressive pieces of realism and social commentary.
He was perhaps the most prominent progressive voice in Indian commercial films.
The older generation recalls his partnership with the legendary Raj Kapoor.
Some of his films won the Nargis Dutt Award for National Integration.
Another won the prestigious Palme d’Or at Cannes.
Shehar Aur Sapna, depicting the struggle for survival in the brutalized environment of an urban slum, won the National Film Award for Best Feature Film.
This promotion of social awareness is what distinguishes him as a writer and film maker.
He revelled in India’s cultural heterogeneity and celebrated it in his life and work.
Jai Hind.
I take this opportunity to salute the memory of Shri Lakshmipat Singhania, a visionary business leader.
Shri Singhania was a fine example of a successful entrepreneur who remained committed to his social responsibility for the welfare of the deprived and marginalized section of our society, especially through spread of education.
The JK Organization and Shri Hari Shankar Singhania have most ably carried forward the rich legacy of Lakshmipat ji.
The importance of the three categories for which the awards are given cannot be underestimated.
A vibrant business sector is a necessity for sustained economic growth and employment generation.
Science and technology are indispensable for addressing major contemporary challenges of economic growth and social transformation of societies.
By selecting these three categories for the awards, IIM Lucknow and the JK Organisation have shown great foresight.
It has been said by a famous statesman ‘if your actions inspire others to dream more, learn more, do more and become more, you are a leader’.
I am confident that all the six awardees fulfill these criteria of leadership.
Their recognition today by conferment of this award would surely inspire others to follow their path.
I extend my heartiest felicitations to the awardees for their achievements and their services to the nation.
I also wish them all success in the future.
I thank the organizers for having invited me.
By 2020, almost 60 percent of India’s population of 1.3 billion will be in the working age group of 15-59 years.
Of these, 144 million will be in the 18-23 age bracket.
I see three major challenges before us in the task of providing adequate skill building opportunities for our people.
In all our endeavours, quality needs to be central, whether it is our primary schools or institutions of higher learning.
So even before we focus on enhancing our capacities and quality in vocational training or higher education, we need to ensure that our primary education system is robust and imparts quality education.
Such shortages create bottlenecks for dispersal of skills.
In addition, the required skill sets are very dynamic, as the nature of industry and manufacturing- as well as the demands of the services sector change.
This mental block exacerbates the gap between what the industry requires and what is currently available.
A society needs a broad spectrum of skills.
It needs engineers, scientists, and doctors as much as it needs the sanitation workers or plumbers or electricians.
We need to groom a reservoir of young talent that is well educated and equipped with the latest breakthroughs in knowledge.
But, we also need to equip millions who still fall outside the pale of formal higher education.
We have to provide avenues to engage them productively by skilling them appropriately.
Skilled workers are required to successfully implement the Government initiatives such as digital India, Swachh Bharat, Make in India and Smart Cities, etc., as only skilled workers can make the most of opportunities being created by such schemes.
Our approach should be aimed at bridging the skill gaps and addressing the problem of unemployability of our youth.
The Government of India is conscious of the need to impart skill training to our people.
Prime Minister Modi, in his address to the nation from Red Fort on 15th August 2014, had said that “skilling is building a better India.
If we have to move India towards development, then skill development should be our mission.”  Initiatives like formation of sector skill councils and formulation of the national skills qualification frameworks, among others, came about between 2009 and 2014.
The National Policy on Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, 2015 takes those initiatives forward.
The PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry has been proactive in promoting skill development infrastructure in the country to address the skill-gaps.
It has worked at the grass-root level, and leveraging its strong national and international linkages, has played an important advocacy role in this direction.
The present seminar is a positive step on the path of skilling India.
I wish you successful deliberation.
Jai Hind.
This is a serious book, a substantive work, a collection of essays that use a conceptual framework to explore aspects of our contemporary society.
For this reason, I am grateful to Prof. Muchkund Dubey and the Council of Social Science Research to have drawn my attention to it and to give me the honour of releasing it formally today.
In this broad conceptual framework but in a departure from it, Professors Ashok Pankaj and Ajit Pandey and other contributors to the volume go beyond historiography and examine subalternity and exclusion in its multiple determinants and dimensions in post-independence India.
Like all serious works, it is not to be classed as easy reading.
Each essay sheds new light on seemingly familiar subject; each compels the reader to think.
The going – at least to this reader – is slow but immensely rewarding.
I congratulate the editors and the publisher for this addition to serious literature.
I am happy to be here for this ceremony to commemorate the Golden Jubilee of the Gobind Ballabh Pant Hospital, an important institution for healthcare services in our capital.
Since its commissioning in 1964 by Prime Minister Nehru the Hospital has emerged as an acclaimed institution for tertiary healthcare.
It has also established itself as centre for excellence in post-graduate education, research and training.
The credit for this goes to the doctors, nurses, students, faculty and staff - past and present – and to their dedication and hard work.
I also take this opportunity to extend my heartiest felicitations to the four awardees who are being recognized today for their outstanding contributions and distinguished service.
The importance of a healthy population is well understood by this audience.
An unhealthy population imposes enormous social and economic costs on society and hinders sustainable development.
Universal access to quality health care is therefore a social necessity and an imperative for sustained economic growth.
It is a critical element of inclusive development and nation-building.
Recent decades have witnessed notable progress.
Our health care system today is a mix of public and private sector providers of health services.
Networks of healthcare facilities at the primary, secondary and tertiary level, run mainly by State Governments, provide free or very low cost medical services.
Due to these efforts almost all indicators of health in the country have shown a positive trend.
High quality preventive and curative care is now available within the country for treating complicated diseases and performing complex procedures.
India is also emerging as an important destination for what is termed as 'medical tourism'.
Despite the gradual progress of recent decades, infant mortality in our country is still over 40 per 1000, while maternal mortality is 2 per1000 live births.
Healthy life expectancy remains about 55 years, compared with close to 70 years reported in countries such as China, the US and Japan.
About 40 per cent of all deaths in India are still due to infections.
The majority of the remainder is mainly due to non-communicable diseases.
Availability of health care services is quantitatively inadequate both in terms of physical infrastructure and trained manpower.
The overall shortage is exacerbated by a wide geographical variation in availability across the country.
Rural areas are especially poorly served.
The quality of healthcare services varies considerably in both the public and private sector.
Many practitioners in the private sector are actually not qualified doctors.
Regulatory standards are not adequately defined, and in any case, are ineffectively enforced.
Affordability of health care is a serious problem for the vast majority of the population, especially in tertiary care.
Lack of extensive and adequately funded public health services pushes large numbers of people to incur heavy out of pocket expenditures on services purchased from the private sector.
Inadequacy of resource allocation is reflected in the fact that India currently spends only 1.2 percent of its GDP on publicly funded health care.
This is considerably less than most other comparable countries.
These problems are likely to worsen in the future as our large population continues to grow.
In this endeavour, a substantial expansion and strengthening of the public sector healthcare system would be required if we are to meet the health needs of rural and even urban areas.
Efforts would have to be made to find a workable way of encouraging cooperation between the public and private sector in achieving health goals.
This would need to be accompanied with the availability of skilled human resources.
I wish the Hospital many more years of service to the nation in healthcare delivery and medical sciences education.
I thank you for inviting me.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be here today for the release of the commemorative postage stamp to mark the centenary of the National Council of Churches in India (NCCI).
I extend my greetings and best wishes to all of you on this joyous occasion.
The NCCI is a truly representative organization of Protestant and Orthodox churches in our country.
It brings together the Churches and other Christian organizations for mutual consultation, assistance and action in all matters related to life and witness.
Since its inception a century ago, inspired by Jesus Christ’s eternal message of love, compassion, forgiveness and selfless service, the NCCI has made invaluable contributions towards the noble task of nation building.
It has faithfully served our Christian compatriots and the society at large.
The NCCI provides a vibrant platform for various denominations of the Christian church and related organizations to exchange ideas and views on relevant social, economic and political issues of common interest and concern.
It is laudable that the NCCI, in true Christian tradition, serves the people on the basis of their needs and without any consideration to their creed, race or political belief.
Over the years, the NCCI has undertaken concrete programmes and projects in critical areas, such as education, healthcare, natural disaster relief and rehabilitation and ecological degradation.
As the National Council of Churches, it addresses concerns related to oppression and injustice in all its forms.
Recognising the realities of our society, it is particularly engaged in the task of upliftment and empowerment of the deprived and marginalised sections of our society, such as the Dalits, Tribals, Women and the Physically Challenged.
The NCCI has also acted against the rising trend of religious extremism and communalism by encouraging responsible evangelism and inter-faith dialogue and harmony.
It would be appropriate to say that the NCCI has been an important vehicle for promoting the overall well-being of our society and country.
It has set an example for others to follow by its spiritual and people-oriented work.
I once again congratulate the constituent members of NCCI for the 100 years of service to their faith and the nation.
The release of the Centenary Commemoration Postage Stamp today is a befitting tribute to the Organisation and its work.
I am confident that today’s function would also provide an impetus for the NCCI and its members to continue their good work in the future.
I thank you for having invited me and I wish you all the best for the future.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be here today for the 48th Annual Convocation of the Indian Institute of Foreign Trade (IIFT).
The occasion attains added importance as this prestigious institution is also commemorating its Golden Jubilee.
In the last five decades, the IIFT has emerged as a centre for excellence in the field of foreign trade management and research.
The credit goes to the faculty, students, staff and alumni of the Institute.
I take this opportunity to congratulate all the students who are graduating today.
Their journey in life, beyond the portals of the Institute, begins now.
Globalisation and new technologies have transformed our planet into a global village.
While competition has increased, so have fresh opportunities opened up in terms of newer markets and sources of capital, technology and natural resources.
Nations have to adapt to these changing realities and rule out isolation or autarky.
This holds true of India also.
Our comparative advantage is in our demographic profile and our reservoir of human resources.
We have the second largest working population in the world.
Our working age population will be, at least till 2040, far in excess of those dependent on them.
This would be a potential source of strength for our economy provided we are able to impart and continuously upgrade the skills and knowledge of our workforce.
Young people like you would be our most valuable resource in this global competition.
As practitioners of international business management, you would also be best equipped to deal with these complex issues.
II Given the occasion and the venue, I venture to share some thoughts on the challenges before us in foreign trade.
Throughout our long history, we have been a trading people.
Evidence of this is to be found in archaeological remains and recorded history pertaining to West, Central and East Asia.
The traditional routes of foreign trade, however, were disrupted in the colonial period; they were re-activated, but haltingly, in the decades after independence.
In the last 30 years, world trade in merchandise and commercial services have increased by about 7 per cent per year on average, reaching a peak of $18 trillion and $4 trillion respectively.
In the same period, developing economies raised their share in world exports from 34 per cent to 47 per cent and their share in world imports from 29 per cent to 42 per cent.
Asia is playing an increasing role in world trade.
Despite the recent global economic slowdown, this trend is likely to get strengthened in the future.
We will, therefore, find ourselves living in a more and more interconnected and interdependent global market place with higher levels of trade and capital flows.
It is not difficult to explain the growth of this phenomenon.
Experience shows that development, including sustained poverty reduction, depends largely on a fast pace of economic growth and measured pace of economic openness.
While economic growth has its own determinants, economic openness is best reflected in a country’s trade and investment flows with the rest of the world.
Trade remains the most reliable and productive way of integrating into the global economy.
In the last decade, India's share in global exports and imports increased from 0.7 per cent and 0.8 per cent respectively in 2000 to 1.7 per cent and 2.5 per cent in 2011.
Our ranking among leading exporters and importers improved from 31 to 19 and 26 to 12 between 2000 and 2011.
Despite this expansion, our share of global trade is disproportionately small given the size of our economy and population and in comparison to other large emerging economies such as Brazil and China.
With the Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations stalled, Regional Trade Arrangements are on the rise in most parts of the world.
Some other challenges, with longer term implications, are mentioned in the World Trade Report 2013.
These relate to: Some other factors relating to availability and pricing of energy, natural resources and primary commodities would be critical, as would be the challenge of availability of water resources for agricultural products so essential for international trade.
Equally relevant would be a stable financial and monetary system and policy decisions with regard to trade facilitation, competition and the environment.
Each of these would require careful consideration and follow up.
Several domestic factors are also in need of urgent attention.
Fiscal consolidation, managing inﬂation, and calibrated liberalisation of capital inﬂows would help create an environment conducive to greater trade and investment flows.
Expediting ongoing negotiations for our own FTAs/RTAs/PTAs in Asia, Europe, Africa and Latin America will be essential to counter protectionist tendencies in other parts of the world.
Tapping the potential of the service sector, such as tourism, including health tourism, would help mitigate fall in other service exports.
These relate to improvement in the poor state of our physical infrastructure, especially ports, airports and highways.
Our fiscal regime, including taxes and customs duties, needs to be more efficient.
Today, India is ranked 132nd in the 'ease of doing business' and 127th on 'trading across borders’.
Most of these matters are at the macro, government policy level.
They impact our external sector and would also confront you as business leaders, entrepreneurs and managers in your work.
I felicitate the students, faculty, staff and alumni of the Institute on this joyous occasion.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be here today for the inauguration of this International Conference on Skilling in Schools being organised by the PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
The agenda for the Conference is relevant and timely as providing productive employment to our population, especially the youth, is a major economic and social imperative for our country.
According to the International Labour Organization, “Skill development is of key importance in stimulating a sustainable development process and can make a contribution in facilitating the transition from an informal to formal economy.
In a globalised and integrated world, skill development helps to create a workforce empowered with required skills, knowledge and internationally recognized certifications to gain access to quality employment and ensure competitiveness in the global market.
It also aims at increasing the productivity and employability of the workforce and enhancing its capability to adapt to changing technologies and labour market demands.
India is blessed with the second largest working population in the world after China.
It is estimated that by 2022, 63 per cent of our population will be in the working age group.
We are also one of the few countries where the working age population will be far in excess of those dependent on them, for at least three decades till 2040, as per the World Bank.
We would, therefore, be in position to meet the requirement of technically trained manpower not only for our own growing economy but also of the advanced economies of the world, most of which have an aging demographic profile.
Failure to do so would have economic and social implications.
The quality of employment in the organized sector is generally high though the scope of additional employment generation in this sector is rather limited.
On the other hand, the informal sector suffers from under-employment, low productivity and even lower wages.
Given the overwhelming percentage of our people working in the informal sector, skill development and up-gradation becomes all the more important.
These sectors, however, need significantly different and often specialist skill sets, which require training and skill development.
It is this skill gap which also needs to be addressed through comprehensive efforts, at various levels, including schools.
There are constraints on supply side as well.
The enrolment in school education level in India is about 227 million but net enrolment in vocational education and training courses is only around 3.5 million per year.
This compares poorly with 90 million in China and 11 million in US.
Skilling of this large and growing young population from an exceedingly small base would be a big challenge.
We can also learn from the strengths of the vocational education and training systems of other countries.
Government is cognizant of the importance of skill development for our national development agenda.
It is also clear that at present there is low penetration of vocational education and training in India.
A National Policy on Skill Development was formulated in 2009 to focus on policy coherence, inclusivity and improving the quality with emphasis on employment outcomes.
An important part of the overall implementation strategy for skilling would have to be development of skills of students at the time of their schooling itself.
Positive and concrete steps have already been taken in this direction.
The Union Ministry of Human Resource Development has introduced multiple schemes that integrate skills training into the school curriculum in an innovative manner.
The Department of Secondary Education has revamped its existing scheme of Vocationalisation of Secondary School Education in 2011.
It envisages strengthening of 10,000 existing secondary schools with vocational stream and establishment of 100 new vocational schools through State Governments.
The scheme also aims at provision of assistance to run 500 vocational schools under PPP mode.
There is a provision for in-service training of existing vocational education teachers and induction training of new vocational education teachers.
250 competency based modules are proposed to be developed for each individual vocational course.
The revision in curriculum is mandatory once in three years to ensure that the curriculum is guided by needs of the industry.
MHRD has also formally launched the National Vocational Education Qualifications Framework (NVEQF) in 2012, to formally integrate vocational education together with current conventional educational streams across schools and higher education space.
Under the framework, various domains have been identified which include Retail, Security, Information Technology, Tourism, Construction, Automobile Technology etc.
It is expected that the programs will cater to at least 5 million students for vocational degree and diploma every year.
It also has the potential to raise the Gross Enrolment Ration from 15% to 30% by 2020, while simultaneously providing meaningful employment.
This is a welcome step.
Hence, changing the mindset towards vocational educational would be an important undertaking as we move forward.
The task that lies ahead is not easy but also not impossible, if we confront it collectively and with determination.
I am happy to know that PHD Chamber has identified skill development as one of the six thrust areas and has been involved in promoting awareness on vocational education.
What is now required is a joint effort by all concerned to realise these recommendations on the ground.
I thank you for having invited me.
I wish the Conference all success.
Jai Hind !
I also cannot erase from my mind the intellectually accommodating ambience of the campus in mid and late fifties, the architectural magnificence of the University mosque, of the buildings around the Strachey Hall, and above all the captivating image of the university cricket ground.
The nostalgia is overpowering.
I extend my felicitations to the students graduating today.
They owe their success to their own industry and dedication.
They should know that the pursuit of knowledge does not end with the portals of the University.
Their journey in life now begins.
Whether they enter the job market or go on to pursue further studies, they must remember that there is no end to education.
I felicitate the personalities who have been awarded the Honoris Causa.
This institution recognises and applauds their contributions to the public good.
Convocations are occasions to acknowledge intellectual excellence and achievement.
They should also be moments of introspection about the purpose of education, its role in society and in the life of the nation.
Many famous names in AMU’s past did just that.
The uniqueness of this institution is evident.
It is a university, a place where men and women gather to seek knowledge in all its manifestations.
There is another aspect of uniqueness evident to all.
It is Muslim, meaning by it an inheritor not only of the sum total of human knowledge but also particularly of the segment bequeathed by the civilisation of Islam.
An institution of higher learning and a cultural entity is not easily given to being a commercial or philanthropic franchise.
In different stages of the University’s history its responses to these were fairly reflective of its intellectual capacity and its commitment to the values and objectives it had prescribed for itself.
Today, the challenge has acquired greater intensity.
The imperatives of the 21st century would sustain and accelerate the pattern, perhaps add new dimensions to them.
They have existed in all civilisations.
A university is a place that not only produces knowledge but also produces doubt, a place that is ‘creative and unruly, home to polyphony of voices’.
It also has a practical objective: to impart skills to get a job or a better job, to improve prospects in life.
I begin with education.
The shortfalls are evident.
Despite educational attainment by segments of society, the base line of literacy at the dawn of freedom in 1947 was 12 percent.
It reached 74 percent in 2011 and is still below the global average of 84 percent.
Nor have they benefited yet from the new schemes of ‘vocationalisation’ of secondary education.
This also holds true for areas of technical and professional education.
Consequently, and in order to accommodate the less prepared, undergraduate teaching often begins at sub-standard levels.
Its impact is pervasive.
Mediocrity thus prevails, with both the teachers and the taught wallowing in it.
Two ingredients of it are critical: the first relates to globalisation of standards and the second to the up-gradation of skills.
Little or no effort is made by the teacher to induce critical and innovative thinking.
The curiosity latent in every young mind is not awakened.
If the student is the innocent victim of this scheme of things, the teacher often is an accomplice.
There is a dire need for inculcating this motivation in our colleges and universities.
Perhaps the malaise has deeper roots.
A major role is played by societal values.
Our society is passing through a callously materialistic phase, one in which money has become the measure of all things.
Eminent scientist and Bharat Ratna awardee Professor C. N. R. Rao spoke recently about the disinclination among the youth to pursue scientific research and innovation and opt instead for more lucrative callings.
This trend does not further the requirement of the best minds devoting themselves to fundamental scientific research.
Correctives are thus imperative and have to begin here and now.
We have to go beyond being affluent  ‘hewers of wood and carriers of water’, or being ‘IT coolies’, and acknowledge that we are living in a highly competitive global knowledge society with receding horizons in which mediocrity means irrelevance.
Here no quarters should be asked for, none given.
It is now for all segments of Muslim society in our country, and those of it in the AMU, to address this challenge without further loss of time.
Success will be rewarded by a place in the ranks of the march of humanity in the 21st century; failure would lead to becoming inconsequential.
III Human endeavours do not take shape in a vacuum.
The societal ambiance is invariably critical.
Change is an unavoidable ingredient of all societies.
We cannot be an exception nor can we be irrationally selectively.
One aspect of change pertains to the place of women in society.
It is inextricably linked both to education and to the dead weight of history and social custom.
It remains a blind spot for segments of our people.
The Constitution guarantees equality to all citizens and prohibits discrimination on grounds of sex.
Despite this, attitudes and practices particularly in regard to education and participation in work force, both of Muslims in general and Muslim women in particular, persist.
The Sachar Report of 2006, and subsequent studies, quantifies this in ample measure.
The gap between the present levels and the national average needs to be bridged at the earliest.
The dead weight of tradition, poverty and communal politics has resulted in Muslim women facing three handicaps.
These relate to: (a) literacy (b) economic power resulting from work and income, and © autonomy of decision making.
The net result is a pattern of structured disempowerment.
Social customs usually represent the crystallisation of occasion-specific requirements; they are neither sacred nor immutable.
Experience of other traditional societies shows that practical correctives can be introduced without transgressing values.
Aligarh, where the first steps were taken in 1906 for the education of Muslim girls, must now help realise the 21st century targets of gender parity.
The same holds for political leadership.
A citizen by definition participates in civic affairs and should be allowed to do so.
I recall what I learnt as a student in this institution.
The civic training of young citizens therefore has to begin early and should be facilitated in educational institutions.
AMU’s annals record the names of freedom fighters and public figures baptised on this campus.
By the same logic, freedom is not synonymous with anarchic behaviour or arbitrary demands undermining the very purpose or ethos of the institution.
Those who wrote grammars of democracy in earlier or modern times did not visualise anarchy as a valid option.
IV An important aspect of this university’s ethos is its assertion of identity within the framework of diversity that characterises modern India.
Ours is a plural society, a secular polity, and a state structure that is democratic and based on Rule of Law.
Plurality is thus an existential reality.
Each ingredient of the mix is important.
We steer clear of notions of assimilation and adaptation, philosophically and in practice.
Instead, the management of diversity to ensure the integration of minds and hearts is accepted as an ongoing national priority.
By the same token, every citizen has to contribute to it.
Segregation, seclusion or self-imposed isolation is un-civic and a transgression of the spirit of a plural society.
The objective is, and should be, to go beyond tolerance of the Other and move towards Acceptance of those who may be different.
This is enshrined in our Constitution; the challenge is to universalise and deepen its implementation.
I have touched upon some aspects of the challenge.
The answer is not with me; I do know it is with the youthful segment of the audience before me.
Such an occasion beckons you today.
I repeat what I had said on an earlier occasion here:  Agar aflak ke tare torne hain to perwaaz ki taaqat paida karni ho gi; sirf guftaar kaafi nahin hai.
A theme that dwells simultaneously on the past, the present and the future is not to be trifled with the uninitiated.
These could be extended to include phenomena like modernity and globalisation.
It is a truism that long periods of alien dominance impart slanted or distorted perceptions.
The task for contemporary scholarship is to correct the slant, not to junk it.
Take the case of India.
The fact that Ibn Batuta was able to continue his travels shows that even then, all rules were not enforced!
Other travellers, Asian and European, followed.
All made comments on Indian practices and traditions.
In our society, therefore, there is a surfeit of recorded and remembered traditions that can be scanned with benefit, emulated or rejected.
No effort has yet been made to disown them wholesale.
He pointed out the overwhelming numerical preponderance of primitive societies (650 by his count in early the 20th century) over those classified as civilisations.
Toynbee’s study, however, had a different focus: to trace the contrast between the diversity of growth of individual societies and the uniformity of their disintegration.
For our purposes today, both civilisations and primitive societies can yield elements of traditional cultures that may be of relevance.
It has been said that differences of conditions among people are the result of the different ways in which they make their living.
As a result, custom causes human nature to incline towards the things to which it becomes used.
It includes material objects, beliefs, images, practices and institutions.
They are not independently self productive or self elaborating.
The sociologist, Edward Shils had drawn up a comprehensive list of “what is not tradition”.
He notes that “although mankind cannot live without traditions and although it cannot live contentedly with the traditions it receives, traditions are both persistent and disrupted.
They survive, nevertheless, in some form.
Traditions are indispensable.
They do not impede forward movement of societies.
They lend authenticity to them.
A good example is our approach to indigenous medicine.
Its efficacy and utility is being increasingly recognisd the world over.
Other examples relate to dispute settlement practices.
These exists in all societies and can be usefully adapted and implemented as alternate, inexpensive, methods of dispensing justice speedily.
Many more models would undoubtedly be cited in this Conference.
It is important to note that tradition and modernity are not antipodes.
Neither is static, consistent, homogenous, mutually exclusive, or in perennial conflict.
The endeavour of locating what is of value in the past, and adapting it into the framework of modernity, has to be inductive rather than deductive.
One aspect of it is alienation from one’s roots; another is benefit derived from the experience and practices of others.
Similarly, norms pertaining to civic and market behaviour would be of relevance.
The second is the question of globalisation.
It is said that it erodes national cultures, and therefore traditions.
Both need to be encapsulated in our approach.
Jai Hind.
A successful diplomat is one who performs his mandated tasks with discretion and without much visibility.
Consequently accolades or recognition are difficult to come by for most diplomats.
I guess this is a constraint which we have to accept.
Judging or comparing the work done by members of the diplomatic service becomes all the more difficult as performances have to be evaluated in the context of both time and the situation.
Each situation, in a particular time period, is unique.
Nevertheless, it is heartening that the S K Singh Memorial Trust led by Manju ji has instituted this award which every year recognizes exceptional work done by one of our young diplomats.
He is a worthy recipient.
I congratulate him for his outstanding services rendered to our compatriots in Saudi Arabia.
His achievements attain more importance given the difficult situation our citizens had to face in Saudi Arabia.
I extend my felicitations and best wishes to Manju ji and the Trust for keeping alive the rich legacy of late Shri S.K.Singh through the institution of this Award.
I thank you for having invited me.
It is the flagship event of the “India and the Great War” Centenary Commemoration Project.
I congratulate the USI and MEA for this initiative.
The First World War was a seminal event in modern history.
It transformed the global political, economic and social order irreversibly.
Its repercussions were felt across the world, including in our country.
A century later and with fading memories, it is relevant to recall its military and the politico-diplomatic aspects as also some wider consequences.
In one of his books Henry Kissinger has penned a perceptive chapter on the events leading up to the war.
His assessment has a wider relevance.
Allow me to cite a passage from it:  “The statesmen of all the major countries had helped construct the diplomatic doomsday machine that made each succeeding crisis progressively more difficult to resolve.
Military planning had, in effect, become autonomous.” The damage caused by the Great War had no parallel in history.
In earlier wars, the civilian populations were generally spared.
In World War I, the casualties suffered by the civilian population from bombing and the famines and epidemics caused by the war far exceeded those suffered by the armed forces.
The War was also unprecedented in terms of resource mobilization.
According to some estimates, the conflict mobilized 65 million troops, claimed around 20 million military and civilian deaths and 21 million wounded.
It imposed a heavy cost on the global economy and led to many serious social problems.
In political terms, the War brought to an end four great empires - German, Austro-Hungarian, Russian and Ottoman - and transformed the geopolitical landscape of Europe and other parts of the world.
One immediate result was the Russian Revolution of 1917.
Economically and militarily, Europe was surpassed by the United States, which emerged from the war as a world power.
They took on, to quote Kissinger again, “a nihilistic character.” These created fertile conditions for future conflicts.
In Asia, Europe and Africa, new states were created out of the former imperial territories of the defeated powers.
These continue to haunt international peace and security to this day, particularly in West Asia and Africa.
The postwar perpetuation of colonial rule and exploitation by the victorious powers, in spite of their professed principles of freedom and democracy, was a wake up call for the nationalist movements in Asia and Africa.
The trend was aggravated by the resentment generated due to forced recruitment of soldiers and labour for war, and the exploitation of resources of the colonies by the imperialist countries.
II  The Great War marked a watershed in the political history of the freedom movement in the Indian subcontinent.
When the war broke out in August 1914, many in our country supported the war effort in its bid to gain Dominion Status.
The Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms of 1919 disappointed the Indian people who longed for greater constitutional changes in the direction of self-rule.
Repressive legislations like the Rowlatt Act rubbed salt to their wounds.
Smaller contingents were deployed in Aden, East Africa, Gallipoli and Salonika.
Around 60,000 troops from undivided India sacrificed their lives in the War.
Over 9,200 decorations were earned, including 11 Victoria Cross.
Despite this, the story of the Indian Army in the Great War has so far received no separate scrutiny.
Today’s Conference is important and relevant in this context.
I wish you all success in your deliberations.
I thank the organizers for inviting me today.
Jai Hind
Your Royal Highness Prince Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud,  Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  It gives me great pleasure to welcome Your Royal Highness and the distinguished members of your delegation to India.
It is my privilege to host Your Royal Highness for the second time.
I have fond memories and vivid recollections of your last visit to India in April 2010 as Governor of Riyadh Province.
The visit of our Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh to Saudi Arabia in 2010 elevated our bilateral relations to a strategic level.
Our two countries have rich historical connections based on geographical proximity and shared cultural traditions.
I am happy to note the presence of a large business delegation accompanying Your Royal Highness.
It reflects the crucial role played by the private sector in our economic engagement.
Your Royal Highness, India deeply values Saudi Arabia as a reliable partner for our energy security.
We, in India, rejoice at the remarkable progress and prosperity achieved by Saudi Arabia under the visionary leadership of His Majesty the King.
The rich experience of our globally reputed companies in executing infrastructure projects of highest standards is at the disposal of our Saudi friends.
Your Royal Highness, India is currently among the fastest growing economies despite the global economic downturn.
To meet the legitimate aspirations of our people, we need to continue on an inclusive and high growth trajectory.
This requires a capital injection of over US$ One Trillion in the years to come in our infrastructure sector including power, refrigeration, ports, highways, supply chains and warehousing.
We welcome Saudi investments, both private and public sector, in India.
As responsible nations, we need to continue our joint efforts to counter the global menace of extremism and terrorism that attempts to weaken the very fabric of our societies.
Peace and stability in West Asia and South Asia is in our common interest.
I am glad that an important MOU on Defence Cooperation has been signed today.
Saudi Arabia has generously embraced a large number of Indian expatriates and encouraged them to flourish and prosper, for which we sincerely thank you.
The positive contribution made by Indians in Saudi Arabia towards the development and progress of their host country has been well acknowledged.
We are confident of the continued support of the Government of Saudi Arabia in ensuring their safety and wellbeing.
Your Royal Highness, we deeply value your sincere affection for India and its people and your personal commitment and contribution to strengthening of our close relations.
Our discussions today have been most rewarding and forward-looking.
I am confident your visit will write a new chapter in our excellent bilateral ties.
Culture is more than just song and dance or architecture.
It is the cumulative deposit of knowledge, experience, beliefs, values, attitudes, meanings, hierarchies, religion, notions of time, roles, spatial relations, concepts of the universe, and material objects and possessions acquired by a group of people in the course of generations through individual and group striving.
Every culture evolves certain unique features of its own which, in their entirety and inter-relatedness, constitute its dominant configuration and differentiate it from other cultures.
Indian culture is distinguished from others in respect of its continuity and heterogeneity, its accommodating ethos and its composite, plural character.
All the religions in the world are equally revered here, and linguistic and cultural diversity of our country is unparalleled.
Despite this diversity, people in India have lived in harmony for centuries and will continue to do so.
This is perhaps because the sense of unity which pervades the fabric of Indian society is intangible.
Yet it is alive inside every Indian and follows from the day to day living in a composite and divergent milieu.
The Indian approach to cultural change has been one of seamless accommodation.
The diversity of Indian cultural landscape is a result of not just toleration of newer and different elements, but of its acceptance.
This is to be witnessed in all aspects of our daily life.
Our right to enjoy the cultural artifacts, and to participate in the cultural life of the community, is reflected in UN’s 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
This prohibits illicit trafficking of artefacts and cultural objects; pillaging of archaeological sites; and destruction of historical buildings and monuments since it cause irreparable damage to the cultural heritage of a community.
These principles have been amplified in UNESCO’s various international conventions on the protection of cultural heritage.
In our Constitution, Article 49 provides the Directive to the State to protect monuments and objects of artistic and historic interest from spoliation and destruction.
In addition, Article 51 A (f) makes it a duty of every citizen to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture.
Laws and regulations can provide the framework for our action, but educating our youth about the value of our pluralistic heritage is perhaps the best way to ensure that our heritage is preserved.
I commend the Indian Trust for Rural Heritage and Development for their initiative in preserving our cultural heritage, both tangible and intangible, in the rural areas, including by educating youth and generating awareness about the issue.
I wish them success in their future endeavors and wish you all a very happy World Heritage Day.
Jai Hind.
I extend my felicitations to Dr. Vijaykumar Vinayak Dongre and Professor Zhang Guocheng for their valuable contributions in the fight against Leprosy.
I congratulate them for receiving the 2013 International Gandhi Award, which they so richly deserve.
It inspires others to emulate the good work done by the awardees.
Leprosy is widely feared as a mutilating, disfiguring, contagious and incurable disease.
The fact is that leprosy is curable and treatment in early stages prevents disability.
It is also true that the disease affects the poor to a much greater extent because of their social and economic vulnerability.
According to WHO, around 230 thousand new cases of Leprosy were detected worldwide during the year 2012.
Pockets of high endemicity still remain in countries like India, Angola, Brazil, the Central African Republic, Madagascar, Nepal and Tanzania, among others.
Though Leprosy control has improved significantly due to national and sub-national campaigns in most endemic countries, it is clear that much more needs to be done.
Further integration of primary Leprosy services into existing general health services will make diagnosis and treatment of the disease easier.
We have to remain firmly committed to eliminating the disease, and also continue to intensify leprosy control activities.
The focus has to be on the under-served populations and inaccessible areas to improve access and coverage of treatment.
Our efforts should concentrate on innovative solutions to reducing the Leprosy burden.
This needs to be accompanied by a reduction, if not elimination, of the socioeconomic challenges related to the disease.
I once again congratulate the two awardees.
Jai Hind
The Year 2014 has been designated by the Governments of India and China as the Year of Friendly Exchanges.
I am delighted to be with you today to launch the celebrations of this special year.
I am confident that the various programmes of the Year of Friendly Exchanges will help forge a closer and stronger relationship between India and China.
We are neighbours.
We are strategic partners.
We are ancient civilizations.
Historically, there was much that bound us together.
Buddhism did travel from India to China.
We ourselves gained immeasurably from Chinese monks and scholars such as Fa Xian (Fa Hsian) and Xuan Zang (Huan Tsang) who came to India in search of Buddhist scriptures.
At the famous Nalanda University, Xuan Zang is known to have outsmarted many an Indian scholar in debates conducted in the Indian languages of Pali and Sanskrit.
The concept of zero in our number system originated in India.
The use of gun powder, the printing press and other technical innovations made their way outward from China.
Analysts have pointed out many common threads between Hindu and Buddhist philosophies on the one hand and Confucianism on the other.
Today, India and China are developing countries often described by observers as emerging economies.
Large trade flows are beginning to bind our countries together again.
Though, it is also correct that greater balance in this trade will ensure its sustainability.
While investments are also beginning to gather speed, we do hope to see more and more Chinese firms establishing a presence in India.
This would mutually beneficial.
We encourage Chinese companies to establish production and supply chains which will link our economies.
This will also ensure a more balanced trade between our two sides.
One of the ideas, which is being looked at carefully is of a dedicated Chinese Industrial Park in India.
I would venture to think that in a large country, such as India, we should plan for several such Chinese industrial zones in our various regions.
If we can give this process a fillip during the Year of Friendly Exchanges, a good beginning would have been made.
The introduction of Chinese, as a language in our middle schools in India, is just such an innovative idea.
Recently, 22 Chinese teachers have come to teach at select CBSE schools across the length and breadth of our country.
This is an excellent starting point.
Greater interaction between the ordinary people of our two countries is a necessary condition for stronger overall bilateral relations.
More tourism, greater student exchanges and enhanced interaction between our Universities and Think-Tanks will help us evolve a better understanding of each other and our respective place in the world.
The annual program in which we have a visit to the other country by a group of 100 young persons is another example of what we must do, but on a larger scale.
We plan to highlight Indian culture in China through a programme entitled ‘Glimpses of India’.
We hope to get the support of all segments of Chinese society in this endeavour.
One of the hallmarks of our bilateral relationship has been the importance of high level exchanges.
Last year, we hosted Premier Li here in India.
Our Prime Minister visited your great country in October.
This facet of our relationship is important for the meeting of minds, which I mentioned earlier.
It is necessary to continue high level exchanges between our countries in the coming years.
Enhancing strategic communication at the leadership level imparts a healthy momentum to our Strategic and Cooperative Partnership.
This would go a long way in promoting better understanding between our peoples and in building a solid, friendly and cooperative relationship between our two countries.
I convey my best wishes for the success of the Year of India – China Friendly Exchanges.
I am delighted that State Councillor Yang is here with us on this occasion.
I thank Ambassador Wei for hosting us this evening.
It is all of you gathered here today who will help realize our cherished goal of a robust India – China friendship.
Thank you.
I am happy to be here today to the 4th Convocation Ceremony of Shri Mata Vaishno Devi University.
This University, in a decade of its existence, is on the path to establishing itself as a premier institution of higher learning.
It is becoming known for providing quality instruction in technical education, basic sciences and in areas of humanities and social sciences.
The funding of the University by the Mata Vaishno Devi Shrine Board is a particularly welcome initiative.
It emulates similar initiatives elsewhere in the country.
There could be no higher calling than imparting quality education to our children and making them better prepared to meet the challenges that lie ahead in life.
I extend my felicitations to the students graduating today.
They owe their success to their own industry and dedication.
In this hour of success, however, they must not forget the vital role played by their parents and teachers who have helped them in achieving their objectives.
Their journey in life now begins.
As J Krishnamurthy said, it is not that you read a book, pass an examination, and finish with education.
Strive to become better human beings for your own sake and for the society you live in.
This is a worthy objective.
The criticality of providing good, relevant, and quality education is thus evident.
The size of our youthful population, perhaps the largest and the youngest in the world, makes this essential for achieving our objectives.
However, in the clamor for progress and prosperity, defined mostly in economic terms, we run the risk of underestimating the importance of social and ethical content in education.
This is essential for the survival and progress of our society.
II The Constitution of India is the fundamental law of the land and the foundation on which our Republic rests.
The principles of democracy, secularism and rule of law along with the ideals of justice, liberty, equality and fraternity are firmly embedded in our Constitution and constitute its basic structure.
These principles provide the framework with in which our polity and society is to be governed.
So is ensuring the separation of powers between the three pillars of government and between the constituent units of the federation.
Reconciling the limits to government powers with individual rights and duties is also essential.
It is the Constitution that provides a functioning framework for the attainment of this objective.
It provides the contours of a value system from which an enlightened citizenry could derive guidance.
Needless to say, this solution assumes the existence of an educated and enlightened citizenry, which could also hold its elected representatives in Governments and Parliament accountable.
Creating a responsible citizenry is a task which cannot be left only to the government.
It needs to begin at the school level.
This endeavor would also require the cooperation and support of parents, guardians and the wider community.
III Another value of relevance is pursuit of excellence.
In the world of today, mediocrity has no place.
I am happy to note that the mission of this University is the pursuit of education, scholarship and research at the highest International levels of excellence, particularly in areas of science and technology.
This should include the responsibility to prepare our young people for becoming proud and responsible citizens of this great country.
The University’s focus on moral values and social commitment which is reflected in the vast array of activities being held in and around the campus is also commendable.
Prime Minister Jawahar Lal Nehru once said ‘citizenship consists in the service of the country’.
So to the students gathered here today, I would say that to become good citizens serve your country with devotion and honour.
If you are ever confused about your rights and duties, seek refuge in the Constitution.
It will guide you in the right direction.
Service of the nation in no way precludes the essential pursuit of your personal interests and ambitions, for collective good is a sum total of individual excellence and progress.
Be grateful for what you have received from your parents, elders and teachers: be it their blessings, wisdom or support.
Remember millions of your compatriots are not as fortunate as you are!
They remain deprived and marginalized in this very society.
They need your compassion and understanding.
I once again congratulate the students, their families, faculty, staff and alumni of the University on this momentous occasion.
I wish you all the best for the future.
I thank the Hon’ble Governor of Jammu & Kashmir and Chancellor of the University for inviting me today.
Jai Hind!
I am happy to be here today amongst distinguished scientists, researchers and scholars gathered for the 101st session of the Indian Science Congress.
Over a century ago, the Indian Science Congress Association was conceived to stimulate scientific research and advance and promote the cause of science in India.
Today, this annual congregation has emerged as the country’s premier conclave in the field of with science and technology.
The theme of this year’s conference is Innovation in Science and Technology for Inclusive Development.
This is unquestionably an important challenge on our national agenda.
For this reason, science literacy is an important aspect of societal trust in science, without which science can neither thrive nor serve society.
By the same token, research in many areas and in particular where it addresses complex societal challenges, requires the active involvement of citizens.
Science and technology are indispensable for addressing major contemporary challenges of economic growth and social transformation of societies.
The health of a nation now depends, more and more on, among other factors, the health of the state of its science and technology.
Their knowledge of history made evident to them the connection between technological superiority and political domination.
Given the multifaceted and symbiotic relationship between society and science and the critical role the latter plays in the development of the former, I would like to focus today on the social and ethical aspects of science and technology and its impact on society.
II The influence of science on people’s lives is growing everyday.
While recent benefits to humanity from science, technology and innovation are unparalleled in the history of the human species, there are instances where the impact has been harmful or the long-term effects give cause for serious concerns.
Since the dawn of the modern industrial age, science has been used mainly as a potent instrument for expansion of the frontiers of economic growth and the military powers of some segments of humanity, especially in the developed western world.
This single minded pursuit of economic growth at all costs has imposed major environmental costs on our fragile planet.
It is clear that the current pattern of consumption of natural resources and increasing stresses on environment cannot continue indefinitely without breakdown of the natural systems that make human existence possible.
Weapons created by science have also imposed painful costs on nation-states during the several wars fought since the advent of the 20th century.
The destructive powers of these weapons still pose a clear and present danger to humanity.
They also have a responsibility to mitigate, if not eliminate, the threats posed by excessive weaponization of our planet.
Modern scientific research and development in areas, such as genetics, biotechnology, neuroscience, nuclear physics, space technology and Information Technology have transformed our world as never before.
Gandhiji had listed ‘science without humanity’ as one of seven deadly sins.
Scientists, therefore, have an onerous responsibility towards society and their fellow beings.
They must distinguish between socially beneficial and socially harmful applications of their research and innovation.
The assumption that gaining of scientific knowledge must lead automatically to commercial exploitation of that knowledge for profit is morally dubious.
Larger public good must prevail over individual and purely commercial interests, especially in areas such as healthcare, food, energy, water and other basic human needs.
This inequality in access to new technologies and innovations could exist between different social strata of a society and between the countries of the developed North and developing South.
These attitudes could be partially blamed on the incessant highlighting of industrial hazards and ethics by the media and interest groups.
The public is also unaware of the valuable services rendered by the scientific community towards their wellbeing.
Scientific advances are never, in themselves, a guarantee of social gain.
Science has to be fully integrated with broader needs of society.
Science also has to be cognizant of the social and ethical imperatives, which are integral to our being human and the basis of our civilization.
Jai Hind !
I am happy to have been invited for the inauguration of the 5th International Conference on Translational Cancer Research,the subject of immense importance.
The Conference brings together distinguished doctors, experts, researchers and scholars in this field from India and abroad.
It will provide the participants with a useful platform to share experiences, ideas and developments on the preventive, curative and translational research aspects of cancer.
Cancer is a dreaded disease which evokes fear and a sense of resignation in all of us.
It is a killer ailment which also imposes a heavy psychological and financial burden on its victims, their families and the entire medical system.
According to International Agency for Research on Cancer, in 2012, the worldwide burden of cancer rose to an estimated 14 million new cases per year.
This figure is expected to rise to 22 million annually within the next two decades.
In the same period, cancer deaths are predicted to rise from an estimated 8 million annually to 13 million.
In 2010, the total annual economic cost of cancer was estimated to reach approximately US$ 1.16 trillion.
This imposes heavy social and economic costs on the already challenged economies in these countries.
What is distressing is that this terrible situation need not be so.
Failure to do so is not an option.
In India, the situation is grim.
One million new cases of cancer are detected in our country every year.
More than 80% of these are in later stages and difficult to cure.
Government is cognizant of the challenges and is taking steps on all aspects of prevention and treatment of the disease.
In this regard, I commend the Delhi Government for setting up the Delhi State Cancer Institute to provide comprehensive, integrated treatment to cancer patients, especially the poor who are treated free of cost.
Many more such facilities are required country-wide.
I also compliment Mrs Elizabeth Antony on her excellent initiative of bringing out a coffee table book containing a collection of her paintings.
I had written the foreword of this book.
I am now pleased to release it today.
I extend my felicitations to the organisers and the participants of the Conference and wish them all the best in their deliberations.
I thank you for inviting me.
Jai Hind !
I thank Shri Prabhu Chawla and the New Indian Express for inviting me today to this Conclave, to share my thoughts on The Path to Holistic Education.
Needless to say, this question and its wider implications are becoming a critical determinant in the progress and prosperity of our country.
It is a beckoning challenge that has to be faced.
I understand that over the last two days there have been lively discussions on various aspects of education by distinguished panelists from all walks of life.
These would undoubtedly provide valuable inputs in helping us chart the way forward.
Since I do not have the benefit of all that has transpired in this Conclave, this audience will forgive me for talking about education before I talk about holistic education.
The impulse comes from the nature of our society, the present stage of its development, and the size and structure of our population.
It is estimated that over half of our population of 1.2 billion is under the age of 30 years and that by 2020, the average Indian will be only 29 years of age, compared with 37 in China & USA, 45 in Western Europe and 48 in Japan.
This would mean that India will have one of the youngest populations in the world.
Consequently, the provision of high quality, relevant education for all, at primary, secondary and higher levels, including professional, technical and vocational education, would have to be at the centre of our efforts to create an inclusive knowledge society.
The criticality of the problem raises three questions: In regard to the first question, the answer is an emphatic no.
It is sustained by candid data in expert reports and civil society assessments.
At the primary, secondary and tertiary levels, facilities have expanded, enrolment has increased, but quality has declined.
The second question unavoidably brings forth a tale of woe.
Consequently, and in order to accommodate the less capable, undergraduate teaching often begins at sub-standard levels.
Its impact is pervasive.
Mediocrity thus prevails, with both the teachers and the taught wallowing in it.
Nor are matters any better in higher university education since the input determines the output in good measurement.
Almost six decades later in 2007 the National Knowledge Commission found the existence of what it termed a quiet crisis in higher education that runs deep.
It concluded that the time has come to address this crisis in a systematic and forthright manner.
The overall impact of the resulting picture is adequately reflected in the various employability assessments in the public domain as also in the modest quantity of scientific research emanating from institutions of higher education and research.
This is a societal and economic security imperative that cannot be evaded.
It would in turn promote durable peace, comprehensive security, inclusive development and social cohesion in our society.
A newer factor is the emerging profile of private education providers.
Some figures are indicative of the change.
The recently published Annual Status of Education Report 2013 indicates that private school enrollment even in rural areas has gone up from around 18% in 2006 to 29% in 2013.
Other reports show that around 60% of total enrolments in higher education are now in private institutions.
II It is in this context that I propose to discuss today the concept of ‘holistic education’.
It encompasses a wide range of philosophical orientations and pedagogic practices.
Its focus is on wholeness, on interconnectedness of experience and reality.
It is important to comprehend it in the context of our times and in our present-day pre-occupation with identifying education and skills with market forces and employability.
As a consequence, human values and all that goes to make us better human beings are neglected.
The challenge therefore is to negate it by an alternate approach.
According to some, education that inculcates values for living in harmony with oneself and one’s natural and social environment, as well as the universal human values, inherent in the human nature, could be defined as holistic.
As the philosopher Plato put it, the mark of an educated person is the willingness to use one’s knowledge and skills to solve the problems of society.
Holistic Education instills students with a proactive social conscience.
It equips them to live creatively, responsibly, and harmoniously in a society and become agents of change for a better society.
It provides the guidelines of a value system from which a holistic system of education could and should emanate.
The corrective needs to begin at the school level.
A good model, yet to be fully implemented, is the National Curriculum Framework of 2005.
The child is a born and natural learner whose own initiatives can be used as a resource by an imaginative teacher.
A pre-requisite is to make the child free of fear, trauma and anxiety and help the child to express views freely.
It is at this stage that the seeds of scientific temper, humanism and curiosity can be inculcated, and carried forth in middle and senior school levels and beyond it to college and university.
A critical aspect of correctives pertains to teacher quality, teacher training, and teacher-commitment.
Much has happened to discredit a once noble calling in our society.
A commitment to professional calling and feeling of intellectual independence and conscious avoidance of prejudice is thus essential.
Helping students learn to appreciate, demonstrate sensitivity and skills in fulfilling their share of responsibility as citizens towards shaping of a better society is an important national objective.
Our education system would therefore have to vigorously promote and instill in our youth and students the ideals embedded in our Constitution so that they become better and more responsible citizens of tomorrow.
We have the potential to achieve it given the resolve and commitment by all concerned.
I congratulate the organizers for this initiative and venture to hope that it would further the debate on this crucial aspect of our national life.
Jai Hind.
Over the years, its alumni and teachers have contributed to national life in different fields.
At the time of independence, this university had a student body of 3,893 and a budget of 23 lakh rupees.
Today the strength of student’s community on the campus has grown to around twenty thousand.
Another sixty thousand students are enrolled in its one hundred and twenty-three affiliated colleges in different undergraduate and post graduate courses.
Some definitional clarity is relevant.
The concern I propose to address today pertains to the extent and degree of our success in this endeavour.
The Radhakrishnan Commission in 1949 reported ‘an uneasy sense of the inadequacy of the present pattern’ of higher education.
This is being implemented through the Right to Education Act of 2009.
The right to education does not extend to higher education which in all societies is based on choice and merit.
The first involves options, the second a capacity to benefit from it.
Our literacy level, which was 65 percent in 2001 rose to 74 percent in 2011.
This trend, despite gender imbalance, will continue and may even accelerate.
India has the third largest higher education system in the world.
We have around 652 universities and university level institutes that impart higher and technical education.
They also provide affiliation to more than 33,000 colleges and institutes.
According to some estimates, round 27.5 million students are enrolled in these institutions across the country.
Wide disparities still exist in enrolment percentages among the states and between urban and rural areas.
Disadvantaged sections of society, including SCs, STs, Minorities and women, have significantly lower enrolments than the national average.
And yet, less than one-fifth of the estimated 120 million potential students are enrolled in our higher education institutions, which is well below the world average of 26 per cent.
At the same time, we have yet to create sufficient capacity by way of skills training to accommodate those who cannot or would not proceed for higher education.
Our system turns out nearly seven lakh science and engineering graduates every year.
On the other hand, industry surveys show that only 25 percent of these are employable without further training.
It is thus evident that we confront multiple crises that relate to the input, the process, and the output.
Its impact is pervasive.
Our first problem is thus with the new entrants to universities.
Yet, and with the exception of the top level, principally in urban areas, the average is poorly schooled and often unprepared to absorb undergraduate teaching in colleges and universities.
Acquisition of knowledge, which should be the primary purpose of going to a university, necessitates a questioning mind.
Reports of absenteeism make disturbing reading.
III The importance of higher education has been reiterated by the Government in the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
The world over, there is a positive correlation between the gross enrolment into higher education and per capita GDP.
Higher education equips young people with skills relevant for the labour market and the opportunity for socio-economic mobility.
It is an input into the creation of a responsible citizen body through which our national goals, developmental priorities and civic values can be examined and refined.
In the 21st century, the world is increasingly moving towards a knowledge economy, where industrial trade relations are being replaced by a complex system of information exchange.
This has shifted the focus to a nation’s abilities and resources to produce and generate new knowledge that can place it on top of the global power hierarchy.
Countries are now required to match the global demand for skills with appropriate supply of human resources in order to remain competitive in the global market place.
The massive expansion in enrolment in recent years has resulted in unbearable burden being put on the physical and pedagogic infrastructure of colleges and universities.
Shortage of teachers, and failures to fill in time, vacant faculty positions, has added to it.
In many universities, particularly those funded by State governments, budgetary shortfalls lead to faculty positions deliberately being kept vacant.
Two areas of particular concern pertain to budgetary allocations to higher education and to research incentives and outputs.
We spend only around 1.2% of our GDP on higher education which is much less than other large developing countries such as Brazil and China.
The use of technology in higher education remains limited and standards of research and teaching in our universities are below international standards with no Indian university finds a place in the rankings of top 200 institutions globally.
The picture is no better in social sciences and humanities.
The Parliament’s Standing Committee on Human Resource Development in its 248th Report of February 26, 2013 sought to diagnose the problem.
Today, around 60% of total enrolments in higher education are in private institutions.
This would translate into a very large number of young persons.
Some of the main policy initiatives in the Twelfth Plan relate to the adoption of state-specific strategies given that almost 39% enrolments are in state universities.
Some of the steps include enhancing the relevance of higher education through curriculum reforms, promotion of research and quality education, vocationalisation, use of Information & Communication Technology in education, networking and distance education.
Given the structure of our higher education system, the attainments of these objectives would need to be a collective effort of the Central and State Governments.
Other proposals include the establishment of publicly or privately funded Research and Innovation Universities.
These are ambitious targets and their achievement would undoubtedly bring about a qualitative change.
And so we come back to the question I posed at the beginning of this talk.
They owe their success to their own hard work and commitment.
They should not forget their debt to society and the country and remain mindful of the millions of fellow citizens who are deprived and marginalized and need compassion and help.
Challenges in Indian Agriculture I am happy to have been invited to deliver the Fourth Chaudhary Ranbir Singh Memorial Lecture in Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak.
Chaudhary Ranbir Singh ji was a committed Gandhian, a freedom fighter, an eminent constitutionalist and Parliamentarian, an able administrator, a prolific institution builder and a popular leader connected to the masses.
His role as Irrigation Minister of Punjab in the development of the Bhakra Nangal Project is a testament of his vision.
His work for the upliftment of the marginalized and deprived sections of society, especially peasants and workers, gave him a prominent place in the pantheon of leaders in the post independence era.
He said: “I am a villager, born and bred in a farmer’s house.
Naturally I have imbibed its culture.
I love it.
All the problems connected with it fill my mind.
I think that in building the country, the villagers should get their due share and villagers should have their influence in every sphere”.
He went on to say - “we want to create a classless society.
All backward people are either peasants or workers... We should protect working classes; those farmers and workers”.
It is often said that India resides in its villages with around 69% of our population living in rural areas.
Around half of our population is either wholly or significantly dependant for their livelihoods on some form of farm activity – be it crop agriculture, horticulture, animal husbandry or fisheries.
Though, agriculture now accounts for only 14% of the GDP and 11% of our total exports, it is an essential link in the supply chain of the manufacturing sector and at the same time constitutes a big market for the industrial products.
Agriculture, obviously, plays an important role in rural development in the country.
Accelerating growth of agriculture production is therefore necessary not only to achieve an overall GDP growth rate and meet the rising demand for food, but also to increase incomes of those dependent on agriculture and thereby ensure inclusiveness in our society.
Given the low levels of infrastructure and human development indices, and in a context replete with inequalities and other socio-economic challenges, the future of rural India would largely depend on the positive transformation of Indian agriculture.
Global development experience, especially from the BRICS countries, reveals that one percentage point growth in agriculture is at least two to three times more effective in reducing poverty than the same magnitude of growth emanating from non-agriculture sector.
Herein lies the importance of agriculture for a developing country like ours.
Since independence, we have made notable progress in agriculture and allied activities.
Due to the combined efforts of the governments, scientists and the farming community, we have succeeded in achieving record production of around 259 million tonnes of food grains during 2011-12 compared to 52 million tonnes in 1952-53.
India has emerged as a net exporter of rice, wheat, maize etc.
India ranks second in fruits and vegetables production in the world, after China.
It was achieved through effective transfer of latest crop production technologies, including high yield variety seeds, fertilizers, irrigation and mechanization, to farmers under various crop development schemes, backed by remunerative prices for various crops through enhanced minimum support prices.
Thus, raising the farm output is a necessity not just for food security but also to boost growth in secondary and tertiary sectors of the economy.
Progressive fragmentation of land holdings, degrading natural resource base and emerging concerns of climate change are escalating pressure on land and water.
This will need to be a collective effort of central and state governments, private sector and the farmers.
Universities and research institutions also have a vital role to play as agricultural research and extension has played a vital role in agricultural transformation.
Others call for an increase in public outlay for research in this area to 1 per cent of the GDP from the current 0.7 per cent.
I am happy that Chaudhary Ranbir Singh Chair and Chaudhary Ranbir Singh Institute of Social and Economic Change of Maharishi Dayanand University are actively working in these areas.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be here today for the inauguration of the International Relations Conference on ‘India and Development Partnerships in Asia and Africa: Towards a New Paradigm’ organized by the Symbiosis International University, with the support of the Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India.
The theme of the Conference is relevant to the emerging world scenario in which the older paradigm of international economic relations and cooperation is increasingly becoming obsolete.
The panel of distinguished speakers will shed much light on a new approach that has been developed by us in India in regard to development partnerships with specific reference to Asia and Africa.
Its results are noteworthy.
My reason for doing so is to address the apparent paradox of prospering regionalism in most parts of the world and its miniscule presence in our immediate neighbourhood.
II This audience knows well that our world has been transformed into an integrated and interdependent global village.
New technologies are blurring the political, geographical and socio-cultural boundaries that have kept the world divided over millennia.
Today we are increasingly interlinked, have enhanced competition, and are beneficiaries of the globalized market place.
The traditional North-South divide is being altered by the growth and development in the emerging economies of the South.
The continuing economic and financial problems of the industrialized countries have led to a narrowing of the economic gap between developed and developing countries.
As a result, the balance of economic power is slowly but surely shifting from Europe and North America to Asia and Latin America.
Africa’s growth performance has also improved hugely since the start of the 21st century.
The decline in the Official Development Assistance of the developed countries has propelled the developing world to seek new and innovative sources of funds for their development agenda.
In this regard, the emergence of regional economic integration in different regions of the world, with integrated markets for goods, services, investments and technology, is proving to be an effective vehicle for seeking prosperity.
Regional cooperation, of course, had an earlier beginning and preceded globalization.
Western Europe in the post-World War II period witnessed the formation of the European Coal and Steel Community and the EURATOM leading to the European Economic Community and eventually to the European Union.
This example has been emulated, in varying degrees, in other regions of the world.
In Asia, the ASEAN and GCC are at different stages of economic integration, while groups like IOR-ARC, BIMSTEC and our own SAARC are trying to move forward.
In Africa, the African Union and the regional communities, such as SADC, COMESA, EAC and ECOWAS, are doing concrete work.
North America has the NAFTA and aspires to be a part of a future FTAA.
Similarly, APEC and ASEM are inter-continental groups that have been established to promote economic partnerships across continents.
Most regions of the world are endowed with their own physical, economic and political geography which poses challenges to economic development.
In some, political borders are not aligned with economic and natural resources.
National economies and populations, on the other hand, are generally small and have poor connective infrastructure.
Regional integration and cooperation offers the means to overcome these obstacles and to be competitive in the global marketplace.
Examples of this are to be seen in ASEAN, the African Union, GCC and some of the Latin American regional groupings.
The one exception to this trend is South Asia.
It is confronted with major developmental challenges of poverty, inequality, illiteracy, disease, hunger and homelessness.
The region is endowed with a rich but fragile ecosystem, which is vulnerable to the high population density and major natural disasters such as floods, draughts, cyclones earthquakes etc.
Common geography, economic and ecological complementarities, historical and cultural affinities provides sufficient incentives for intensive regional cooperation.
India’s large and growing economy offers to states of the region a profitable destination for their exports and a competitive source for their imports, investments and technology.
A recent IMF study found that the spill over effects of India’s increased growth to other SAARC countries were positive.
A cooperative framework for these would prevent potential political disputes arising out of these.
Given the cultural, social and religious affinities, enhanced intra-region travel and tourism will not only promote people-to-people contacts but contribute substantially to the regional economy through revenue and employment generation.
Despite these potential benefits, however, South Asian economies remain the least integrated.
[Data Source: UNCTADstat 2012]  Foreign direct investment (FDI) amongst SAARC member states is minimal, due to regulatory issues and a non-facilitative business environment.
Intra-region travel and tourism is also below desired levels.
The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation was set up in 1985.
Progress towards its stated objectives has been tardy.
Declarations at summits and official level meetings do not amount to regional cooperation or integration.
Regional cooperation should enable freer movement of people, of goods, services and ideas.
It should help us re-discover our shared heritage and build our common future.
Global observers have also noted our policy approach of developing cooperation with other regional organisations in and around Asia and have contrasted it with our studied neglect of SAARC.
One ingredient of this hierarchy is a peaceful neighbourhood.
An effective way of achieving it is through mutually beneficial cooperation with neighbours, an endeavour in which India is best placed to set the pace.
Immobility, however, is not a desirable option.
I wish the conference all success.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be here today as we observe an important event in the global calendar.
It is appropriate that our National Human Rights Commission should take a lead in celebrating it.
When the NHRC was established it was seen as a significant development in the history of Human Rights in India and in the developing world as a whole.
Over the years, NHRC has found recognition internationally.
It played a significant role during the setting up of the United Nations Human Rights Council and participated in various seminars and consultative meetings that led to the creation of a viable institutional mechanism for the Human Rights Council.
As we mark this Day today, we need to introspect on some human rights matters affecting our citizens.
We take pride, with justice, in the fact that we have put in place the requisite intellectual, legal and institutional framework for protection and promotion of human rights as a national responsibility.
Questions however continue to arise with regard to their efficacy in actual implementation.
Violations are widespread, discrimination based on religion, caste, language, ethnicity, creed, work, descent and economic status continue to occur with disturbing frequency.
These violations relate to denial of rights by State agencies, by individuals and groups.
The weaker party is the invariable victim.
The Annual Reports of NHRC provide details of these and of the corrective action taken.
The nature and extent of violations are a cause of concern.
There is a gap between what the official agencies project and what is perceived to be the situation on the ground.
As a robust and vibrant democracy we are guided by our Constitution and the principles, rights and duties enunciated therein.
We are also bound by our international commitments.
The International Humanitarian Law and its provisions find a strong echo in our constitutional principles and we, both as a national and international responsibility, have an obligation to reduce the gap between principle and practice.
II The issue of rights of individuals living in societies has been raised and addressed in all periods of history, in all thought systems and in all civilisations.
These rights were variously described as natural, inalienable, incontestable, and even sacred.
The question always was of their ambit, of their circle of inclusion and exclusion and of the gap between promise and reality.
It set “a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations”.
Their observance presents a mixed picture.
By the same logic, it often becomes a politicized activity and the HR Institutions nationally and internationally come under pressure to endorse politically conditioned outcomes.
As a result universal principles tend to be invoked, or overlooked, selectively.
The malaise is widespread and the record of both the Cold War and the post-Cold War periods in all parts of the world testifies to it.
The setting up of the Human Rights Council and its mandate to work with National Human Rights Institutions and of Periodic Review Procedures is expected to improve matters.
III In this context of partial successes and noticeable failures, allow me to raise some larger conceptual issues.
The beneficiaries of human rights are individuals who live in sovereign states that together constitute the community of nations.
This is not a community of equals and exists with more than one disjuncture pertaining to their capacity to influence matters.
The interests of individuals therefore often get subordinated to the interests of nations.
The intent of the Charter and of the Universal Declaration is thus subsumed in the structural framework of the international community.
It does not stand alone.
The term also figures amongst the purposes and principles outlined in the Charter of the United Nations.
It is the voice of the victims that needs articulation.
But between the suffering and enunciation of human rights falls the shadow of state sovereignty.
This necessitates a relook at the traditional approach.
Justice is the first principle of social institutions.
It focuses on a sense of fairness.
It necessitates the creation of institutions and environment that provide relief and begin the process of healing.
Providing justice itself constitutes partial relief from suffering.
This requirement of justice cannot be subject to political bargaining or the calculus of social interests.
It follows, therefore, is that normative principles relating to human rights have to be related to human wrongs and, unavoidably, to a sense of morality.
The challenge now is to re-imagine the two in a construct that brings about a convergence between the morality of means and of ends, a universal humanitarian morality that underpins and moulds considerations of security, national and global.
Such an approach may be dubbed utopian.
Jai Hind.
Lost in the process is the work underway at the third level of governance, better known as the Panchayati Raj Institutions.
The volume before us, compiled by the Institute of Social Sciences, offers a comprehensive corrective.
This is to be compared to the 4,963 elected representatives in the two houses of Parliament, twenty seven State and Union Territories Assemblies.
The number of urban and rural local bodies is equally astounding.
The Panchayati Raj system is founded on the tenet of decentralisation.
More importantly, it also offers a formula for achieving the required change through a three dimensional approach of political will, people’s awareness and building healthy conventions and traditions, backed by constitutional and legislative measures.
The history and evolution of Panchayat Raj system in our country is well known.
The critical fillip was administered through the 73rd and 74th Amendments to the Constitution in 1993, giving them a constitutional sanction.
The question before us pertains to the performance and impact of the Panchayati Raj Institutions and to their role in enhancing the overall quality and effectiveness of the system of governance.
The volume before us provides the answers.
It dwells on the present state of these institutions.
The district and block level data has been put to good use by scholars who have contributed to this study.
Amongst the positives, the most important is the unprecedented widening of the democratic base of the Indian polity.
Apart from the number of elected representatives is the unparalleled increase in the number of women and Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in both rural and urban local bodies.
This bodes well for the inclusion and empowerment of the marginalised and deprived sections of society.
Despite the challenges of ‘proxyism’, women representatives have performed exceptionally in the local bodies, in terms of leadership, integrity, responsiveness and sensitivity.
The projection in this study is that after 10 to 15 years, women may occupy more than 50% seats in all three tiers of the Panchayati Raj system.
The required correctives need to be administered on a priority basis.
A critical area of concern is the role of the State Governments in terms of recognising the jurisdiction of local bodies and devolving financial and human resources to them.
Failures on this count could have far reaching implications not only for the Panchayati Raj Institutions but also for other levels of governance, given the electorate’s expectations on participation and accountability.
I commend the contributors for their scholarly diligence and the Institute of Social Sciences for undertaking this excellent project.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to have been invited for the inauguration of the International Conference on Digital Libraries being organised by ‘The Energy and Resources Institute’ (TERI).
I welcome all the participants and wish them a pleasant stay in Delhi.
In all periods of history, civilisations built libraries as repositories of knowledge and information stored in the form of books, scrolls and manuscripts.
In modern age, libraries became a more universal institution and have played a critical role in the higher evolution of human civilization.
The advent of Information and Communication Technologies, which has revolutionized our world in all walks of life, has also transformed the library systems.
It has inherent advantages and is not limited by the usual constraints of physical boundary.
There is consensus that knowledge would be the key driving force in the 21st century.
The ability to use and create knowledge capital will determine a country’s capacity to empower and enable its citizens by increasing human capabilities.
The challenge before us would be to overcome the digital divide that exists between countries of the north and the south; regions within national boundaries and on the basis of socio-economic stratification.
I am happy to be here in Mumbai for the inauguration of the 48th Annual Conference of the Association of Plastic Surgeons of India.
The theme ‘authentic, benevolent and conceptual’ chosen for the event is thought provoking and apt for this distinguished gathering.
A healthy population is an essential element of inclusive development and nation-building.
Universal access to quality health care is not only a social necessity; it is also an imperative for economic growth and prosperity.
An unhealthy population imposes enormous social and economic costs on society and hinders sustainable development.
Since independence, we have made notable progress in medical sciences and healthcare.
Our health care system today is a mix of public and private sector providers of health services.
Networks of healthcare facilities at the primary, secondary and tertiary level, run mainly by State Governments, provide free or very low cost medical services.
High quality preventive and curative care is now available within the country for treating complicated diseases and performing complex procedures.
Our healthcare system still suffers from major weaknesses.
The public awareness of treatment possibilities is also increasing and which, in turn, increases the demand for medical care.
The much desired goal of provision of high quality, affordable healthcare for all will have to be addressed with the urgency and seriousness that it rightly deserves.
Its realization will have to be a collective effort of government, private sector and the non-profit sector.
The cost of not doing so is evident.
According to a 2005 WHO study, the estimated economic loss to India due to deaths caused by all the diseases was 1.3% of its GDP.
With an increase in the number of non-communicable diseases this loss, if it is not checked, is apprehended to increases to 5% of GDP by 2015.
Lack of access and affordability of plastic surgery enhances this misperception amongst the masses.
However, we are all aware of the importance of this branch of medical science.
Plastic surgery has emerged as one of the most beneficial and crucial medical procedures in the world.
So is the complexity and variety of diseases and deformities, congenital or accidental, with which they are afflicted and need treatment for.
Abject poverty and growing inequality prevailing in our society compounds the problem.
The challenge for you, ladies and gentlemen, is make available the unbelievable benefits of modern procedures in plastic surgery to the masses, especially the poor and the needy.
This corrective would obviously have to address the three issues of quality, affordability and access in plastic surgery.
I understand that you have a comprehensive programme and agenda for this Conference.
I am confident that your discussions and sharing of experiences over the course of this conference will be productive and useful.
New ideas and solutions to vexing problems would come out of your deliberations.
I thank the organisers for having invited me and I wish the Conference all success .
I was particularly happy to come here as it is a historical city.
For a long time, people from different regions of the country came here and settled down.
So it has its own particular nature and the people of Maharashtra as well as the government of Maharashtra have always know this well.
Fortunately, Urdu is the mother tongue of a sizeable number, possibly of a majority of the people living in this city.
This is the language of the army, the language which was born at the crossroad and which has been assimilating in its fold words and terms not from today but for many centuries.
If you go to Hyderabad, you will find many word of Dakhni in it.
People came from different places and different directions and whoever came here become an India.
But, as in history, languages also have their ups and downs.
I am sure this conference will be a great success.
The Press Council of India was established on November 16 and this day is rightfully commemorated throughout the country.
It recommends and honours the values of ethical and free reporting.
India is the world’s largest democracy and despite its imperfections remains a good example of a functioning, vigorous, constitutional and democratic state structure.
Like most other liberal democracies, our functioning is predicated on the separation of powers between the executive, legislature and the judiciary and a significant role for the Press and the Media.
The underlying principle of freedom of speech and expression within the four corners of the law defines our democratic identity.
Both are guaranteed as a Fundamental Right by our Constitution.
Freedom of the Press and Media is a logical corollary.
The Press Council is a mechanism for the Press to regulate itself.
Its raison d’etre is rooted in the concept that in a democratic society the press needs at once to be free and responsible.
The Press and Media in India give vigorous expression to different perspectives on political, developmental and social issues.
Doordarshan itself has 37 channels with over 250 FM radio stations and numerous internet websites.
It nevertheless upholds the principle of free expression, within the law, and remains an essential part of a functioning democratic system.
51.8% of India’s population is below 35 years of age.
It is estimated that in the next general elections due in 2014 there will be over 30% of the electorate who will be first time voters and will seek to reflect their aspirations and anxieties at the hustings next year.
They would need to understand the functioning of our democracy, the manner of its impact on their lives, and their responsibilities as citizens.
Two questions come to mind.
There is another aspect of the responsibility of the Press and Media that I wish to highlight.
India’s Press has a long and venerated history and played an important role in the freedom struggle.
Gandhiji himself was perhaps the most influential editor and journalist of his time.
He used his writings to give Indians a sense of pride and dignity, apart from motivating them to unite and fight for freedom.
We have every reason to be proud of the strength and diversity of the Indian media.
But what remains crucial is the credibility and commitment of the Press and Media to objectivity and to that elusive search for “truth”.
The concept itself can be elusive, has hidden pitfalls, and requires closer scrutiny.
Public education is one aspect of it, analysis and criticism is another.
Some disconcerting developments in relation to the media have also been noticed.
Perhaps the regional media shoulders a greater share of this avoidable burden.
The need for presenting a more balanced picture is essential.
There are also larger systemic issues that need to be considered as they directly affect the Media’s objectivity and credibility.
Each of these is the subject of vigorous on-going debate.
There is an imperative need to put in place the required correctives.
But, this claim to press freedom has legitimacy only if it is exercised with a due sense of responsibility.
The Press must, therefore, scrupulously adhere to accepted norms of journalistic ethics and maintain high standards of professional conduct”.
I thank Justice Katju for inviting me today.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be here today for the Fourth Biennial Conference of Asian Society of International Law (ASIL) being hosted by the Indian Society of International Law (ISIL).
I extend my warm welcome to the distinguished participants.
By a happy coincidence today we are celebrating the birthday of India’s first Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, who had inaugurated the ISIL over 50 years ago.
This platform has excelled as a proponent of the developing countries’ perspectives on international legal issues.
The objective of the 4th Biennial Conference of the ASIL is to provide a vibrant platform for meaningful interaction and exchange among scholars and practitioners in the field of international law in order to promote better understanding of international legal issues and to comprehend the emerging trends.
The theme of this Conference: “Asia and International Law in the Twenty-first Century: New Horizons” is appropriate and timely.
The topics chosen are relevant and reflective of changing times and perceptions.
India’s commitment to international law is enshrined in Article 51(c) of our Constitution which enjoins the State to endeavour to foster respect for international law and treaty obligations.
Three stages are discernable.
Initially, it was essentially European in the first half of the century since nations in the rest of the world did not have independent status.
In that period, and in the period between the two World Wars, the focus was primarily on protection of civilians, humane treatment of soldiers, rights of minorities in Europe and related matters.
In the second half of the 20th century, international law addressed itself to matters pertaining to human rights, genocide, crimes against humanity and racial discrimination.
More specifically, it was compelled to address questions of the right of self determination of people against colonialism; legitimacy of liberation movements and assertion of the right of permanent sovereignty over natural resources by the newly independent countries.
International law was thus essentially concerned with political and economic relations between the States and also between States, the United Nations and other international organisations.
Since the 1990s and in the first decade of 21st century, international law has witnessed a significant evolution in both substantive and institutional terms.
Globalisation has added another dimension to traditional international law.
The rationale for the observance of international norms is evident.
International Law should not be considered as impinging on state sovereignty by creating new structures or norms for regulating relations across borders.
These can be useful tools for interaction and conduct of relations between civilised societies.
International Law as we know derives not from actions of any executive or legislative branch or any central authority, but from customary law and agreements signed by sovereign States.
It also differs in respect of enforcement, which depends not on the power and authority of a central government, but on reciprocity, collective action and international norms.
It is the general belief that the nation-state is the primary unit of international affairs, and only States may choose to voluntarily enter into commitments.
Certain scholars and political leaders feel that these modern developments endanger nation states by taking power away from the governments and ceding it to international bodies such as the U.N. and the World Bank.
They argue that international law has evolved to a point where it exists separately from the mere consent of states and erodes their sovereignty.
This occurs especially when states violate or deviate from the accepted standards of conduct adhered to by all law abiding nations.
Such a consensus, it is evident, cannot be imposed and would be possible only with the participation and consent, amongst others, of Asian countries.
I hope this Conference would come out with some practical and workable ideas in this regard.
I wish the conference success in its deliberations.
I am happy to be here today for this Valedictory Function of the 175th anniversary celebrations of the Madras Christian College.
I congratulate to the students, staff, alumni and management of the College on this important occasion.
It is often said that the worth of an institution is judged by the character of its products.
In this regard the Madras Christian College stands tall and the list of its alumni who have served the country and society with distinction in all walks of life is indeed remarkable.
The current students have a responsibility to maintain this glorious tradition and carry forward a rich legacy.
The founders of the College were inspired by their belief that serving God means more than worship and prayers, and that it is also about putting your love for God into action by carrying out work and service in his name.
For over one and a half century, the College has strived to provide quality education to its students based on the fundamental tenets of academic excellence, social relevance and spiritual vitality.
The importance of faith and values in education has been emphasized in human society down the ages.
Aristotle rightly said that “educating the mind without educating the heart is no education at all”.
More recently, Gandhi ji stressed that literary education is of no value, if it is not able to build up a sound character.
If the young friends in the audience follow these dicta, they will improve themselves and at the same time contribute to making this world a much better place for all to live in.
The goal of education is not to produce machine-like humans.
It is to inculcate in them a social conscience so that they build a fine balance between the heart and mind.
True education should equip individuals to live creatively, responsibly, and peacefully and to become agents of change for a better society.
Two questions arise at this point.
These faculties are intellect or a power of thinking, conscience or a capacity to distinguish between right and wrong, and will or an ability to make a choice on the basis of motive and character.
By the same logic and with the emergence of a global society, however imperfect, perceptions have veered in the direction of universal values.
Some of these have been accepted and incorporated in Declarations accepted by the community of states.
This approach drives us to the conclusion that values have to be inclusive rather than exclusive.
The Constitution of India spells out the framework of values to be nurtured in our citizens.
These include the values for living in harmony with oneself and one’s natural and social environment, as well as the universal human values, intrinsic in human nature.
Nevertheless, a general feeling prevails that there has been an erosion of the essential social, moral and spiritual values in our society.
One reason could be the excessive focus on cognitive to the neglect of the affective in our education system.
These have led, individually or collectively, to insecurities, individualistic life styles, excessive greed, sense of alienation and other negative consequences.
II Allow me to move to another aspect of education.
This is now changing.
Every country will have to create an intellectual repository of human capital to meet its needs and shape its future.
In this context, the importance of quality education cannot be overstated, nor can its shortfall underplayed.
This quality deficit has been described by knowledgeable observers as the Achilles Heel of our higher education system.
In the twenty-first century, education is a critical tool for developing a modern economy, a just society and a vibrant polity.
It provides skills and competencies for economic well-being and social mobility.
Education strengthens democracy by imparting to citizens the tools needed to fully participate in the governance process.
It also acts as an integrative force in society, imparting values that foster social cohesion and national identity.
A well educated population, equipped with the relevant knowledge, attitudes and skills is essential for economic and social development in this century.
It is estimated that developed economies and even China will face a shortage of about 40 million highly skilled workers by 2020, while, based on current projections of higher education, India is likely to see some surplus of graduates in 2020.
Thus, India could capture a higher share of global knowledge-based economy work, if there is focus on higher education and its quality is globally benchmarked.
The challenge is to combine access with affordability and ensure high-quality education in order to realize the potential of the country’s ‘demographic dividend’.
In the coming decades, when technology and innovation would further reduce physical distances, competition would progressively emanate from all corners of the planet.
Political or geographical boundaries will provide no protection against them.
In this endeavour, institutions like the Madras Christian College have an important role to play.
They have to keep adapting to the evolving situation and changing realities in the times to come.
This is not an option but an imperative necessity.
I thank the Principal for having invited me to this function.
I am happy to be here in Chennai for the inauguration of the Diamond Jubilee Celebrations of the New College, a premier institution of higher education in Tamil Nadu.
Since its establishment over six decades ago, the College has made valuable contribution to nation-building through education and research, and remaining committed to the principles of social justice.
It has provided opportunities to first generation students from the Muslim community, and from other socially and educationally backward classes, to pursue higher education and become responsible citizens of the country.
Many of the College alumni have gone on to serve the country, in all walks of life, with distinction.
According to the 2001 census, recognised religious minorities comprise 18.4% of our population, which translates into approximately 185 million people.
This number today could be around 220 million.
If we include others who are claiming inclusion in this category, it could be said in general terms that every fifth Indian citizen belongs to a religious minority.
The Constitution of India is premised on the ideals of justice, liberty, equality and fraternity.
These are promised to all citizens.
At the same time, recognizing the vulnerabilities and specific needs of the minority communities, the founding fathers of our Republic deliberately enshrined in the Constitution the ideas of equality and protection and assurance of rights of minorities.
Equality before the law, equality of opportunity in matters of public employment and prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth are fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution for all citizens.
Articles 15 and 16 enjoin the state to make, inter alia, special provisions for ‘socially and educationally backward’ classes of citizens.
An assessment of the extent to which minorities have benefited from these provisions has to be made on four counts: identity, security, share in fruits of development and role in decision-making.
Among these, the Muslims, the largest minority in the country, are lagging behind on all human development indices.” The scope and scale of the problem were quantified in the Sachar Committee Report of November 2006 and in the Ranganath Mishra Report of May 2007.
While it may be too early to estimate the impact of these measures on the overall condition of the minorities, the preliminary assessment is that their implementation till now has been uneven.
The challenges posed by them need to be addressed in a time bound and effective manner.
The re-emergence of communal tensions in some parts of the country is a cause for concern since it threatens our social fabric.
It is essential that inclusive socio-economic development be accompanied by effective implementation of the constitutional provisions for the minorities.
It is equally important to understand that the attainment of these goals on upliftment and welfare of minorities cannot be left alone to the governments, even though they do have the most important role to play.
All sections of society have a responsibility in this process, including the minorities themselves.
Gandhiji’s oft quoted dictum ‘be the change you wish to see in the world’ should be our mantra.
Alongside, there is an urgent need to generate awareness of government programmes and schemes and community engagement at the local level.
In a democratic polity, the role of elected representatives at local, regional and national level becomes vital.
An educated people are also better equipped to protect their political and cultural rights.
Some of the facts make disturbing reading.
The advancement and mainstreaming of backward segments of the minority communities, especially the Muslims is not a question of charity or welfare.
It is an imperative for India to emerge as a modern, developed nation-state, with its minorities being fully mainstreamed in social, political and economic spheres.
Change is underway; I have much hope from the younger generation in this regard.
I congratulate the students, staff, management and alumni of the New College on the Diamond Jubilee of their institution and wish you all the best for the future.
I am happy to join you this morning for this Inaugural Session of the 11th ASEM Foreign Ministers Meeting.
India is honoured to be the host today.
The vitality and continuing relevance of ASEM highlights its importance as a bridge between Asia and Europe and as a platform for dialogue to promote stability, peace and development.
The theme of the conference, “ASEM: Bridge to Partnership for Growth and Development” is reflective of this.
Our forum brings together 60% of the world's population, 52% of the global GDP and close to 70% of world trade.
Dialogues have to be relevant in situational terms.
We are witness today to important evolution in the political-security and socio-economic architectures across the two continents, as also globally.
In today’s context, therefore, the strategic importance of the Asia-Europe partnership is evident.
We should invest its outcomes with tangible deliverables.
It can also help us to continue the process of understanding and consultation between ASEM countries in order to respond more effectively to global challenges.
While Asia has the strength of emerging markets and its human resource potential, Europe has existing capacities and an edge in technological innovations.
There are natural and beneficial partnerships here, which can be strengthened further.
Bringing about greater focus on areas of relevance for developing countries and emerging markets will allow us to tap into areas of positive growth and prosperity.
This could also serve as an accurate barometer for ASEM to gauge the common aspirations of people in Asia and Europe.
There is a historical tradition of the flow of ideas, practices and systems between the two continents.
We need to see this exchange continue and strengthen.
I would like to commend ASEM FMM-11 for taking on the responsibility to add to the relevance and vitality of ASEM by emphasizing the important dimension of tangible cooperation between its member countries.
ASEM can lead the way amongst the numerous multilateral frameworks that exist today to respond to common challenges at the regional and global level.
Many of these fora are seeing important success and I see no reason why ASEM cannot assume a leading position amongst these.
ASEM has an unparalleled edge in terms of membership, capacity, economic influence, intellectual depth, strategic expertise and political leadership.
ASEM's outcomes must accord greater visibility to these strengths.
This is an ambitious agenda but all of our countries, Excellencies, will have to share the burden.
I sense greater resolve amongst us to deliver on this expectation.
I wish you strength in your collective political will to take ASEM towards greater maturity, success and more tangible outcomes.
I look forward to the continuation of this process at ASEM-10 next year and, I assure you, that India will remain steadfast in partnering Italy at the next ASEM Summit.
Those who know Ashwani Kumar ji are also aware of one aspect of his admirable persona: a certain capacity of unrelenting insistence.
It is no exaggeration to say that these are reflective of a wider, developing, concern amongst many citizens.
In our country and given the inherent contradictions emanating from diversities and inequalities, the operation of a democratic polity was always going to be ‘challenged’.
The corrective lies in the hope that it would emanate from within its framework.
The latter necessitates commitment to the principles as well as the process.
It is for the reader to assess the extent to which the perceptions articulated in this volume assist the process.
Jai Hind.
It is a specialized fast track court equipped with requisite expertise to handle environmental disputes involving multi-disciplinary issues, including those related to forest, environment, biodiversity, air and water.
I understand that India is only the third country apart from Australia and New Zealand to have such an institution.
None of us are immune from the challenges of climate change, ecological degradation, ozone layer depletion and contamination of our freshwater.
At the same time, pursuit of rapid and inclusive economic growth and development is an imperative, especially in developing countries such as ours, to lift the teeming millions out of poverty, unemployment, illiteracy and disease.
It is the obligation of every society and solemn duty of every government to pursue inclusive socio-economic development for the upliftment and wellbeing of its peoples.
Environment and socio-economic development are so intricately linked that development cannot be sustainable without considering its environmental dimensions.
There is a two way relationship between environment and economic growth, wherein natural resources and raw materials, such as water, timber and minerals, are direct inputs for industrial production and at the same time industrial growth can cause damage to environment.
It is, therefore, crucial that we find the fine balance between environmental conservation and economic growth for the sustainability of our development agenda.
The leaders also called for developing a set of universally applicable sustainable development goals that carefully balance the environmental, social and economic dimensions of sustainable development.
It is in this context, that the role of the National Green Tribunal, as an effective and efficient adjudicator, to maintain this precarious balance between the environment and sustainable development and providing speedy justice on matters related to environment and environmental laws is of vital importance today.
Both sides have legitimate arguments and are correct in their views and perceptions.
The challenge is to find a common ground and pave the right way forward which incorporates all dimensions of sustainable development –environmental, economic and social - in a balanced way.
The National Green Tribunal will have to play the role of the independent referee and facilitator, inspired by law and principles of natural justice, as the country marches ahead in its journey on the right and balanced path to development.
The Centre for Environment Law at Worldwide Fund for Nature-India has described the commencement of the National Green Tribunal as a giant step forward towards achieving environmental democracy.
After observing the recent proceedings of the Tribunal and reading its previous judgments, the Centre has also complimented the Judges and Expert Members for having achieved their mission of maintaining the precarious balance between environment and sustainable development in a majority of their cases.
This is a commendable beginning for the Tribunal in the early years since its creation and deserves to be applauded.
In the process, it will also help in reducing the burden of litigation in the higher courts.
I congratulate Justice Swatanter Kumar, other distinguished Members and all others connected with Tribunal on this important occasion and wish them all the best for the future in these new premises.
I thank you for inviting me.
I am happy to be here once again for 59th Annual Meeting of the General Body of the Indian Institute of Public Administration.
I welcome you all to this meeting.
In the 56th Annual General Body Meeting in October, 2010, when I was here last, I had highlighted two issues that we as the premier Institute of Public Administration in the country must address.
First, the primary objective of an administration is to deliver justice to the people it serves, using the most ethical of methods.
This institution has a solemn obligation to instill this ethos amongst the administrators it trains.
Fortunately, it also has the essential wherewithal to do so.
We should also take advantage of the exposure media has given to these issues, in recent time, to make governance - public, corporate and informal - ethical, just, accountable and responsive to the people.
In this endeavour, the large membership of the Institute would be a major asset.
The regional and local centers of the institute should facilitate this exercise for the members through active involvement of state governments, district administration, charitable institutions and socially conscious corporate entities.
It must be kept in mind that public administration is a comprehensive and evolving concept, involving the people and their governance, which has not remained a monopoly of the government in this age.
The Confederation of India Industry (CII) has appreciated IIPA’s initiative on familiarizing industry and its officials with administrative laws and procedures at the Panchayats, district, state and central levels.
This is a laudable initiative and can contribute to a building a transparent, efficient and accountable system of governance.
The focus should be on serious research and analysis of new processes and systems, including the use of technology, that can be adopted at all levels of administration to improve delivery of services to the citizens.
It would also be useful to examine and study some other issues of administration and governance which need to be addressed.
The IIPA could encourage more case studies of successful use of technology, media and simplified procedures/processes in administration as a part of its training and research curriculum.
On the auspicious occasion of the Institute’s Diamond Jubilee, I wish you all success.
I am confident that with dedication and hard work of the faculty and staff, the alumni and the trainees, this institution will consolidate its status as a centre of excellence and national importance in the field of public administration.
An attempt to do it in a single lecture may be foolhardy.
The wish of the College, nevertheless, has to be complied with.
A principal objective of social order is to seek security and to develop the capacity to face challenges to it through a systemic attempt to synergize its various dimensions.
The political structure of society is part of these core values and has a vital interest in defending it.
This establishes a convergence of interests.
The efficacy of individual political structures is to be judged in terms of the objectives they assign to themselves.
In the case of a modern democratic state, its four essential ingredients are legitimacy, consensus, consent, and compliance.
The citizen body bestows legitimacy by concurrence on the objectives and gives its consent to comply with the directives pursuant to these objectives.
It also expects appropriate results; failure or shortfalls is factored into the democratic accountability process.
State power is a central aspect of these structures but it is not the only key variable.
For purposes of today’s discussion, our focus is on the latter and specifically on its political and policy aspects.
At this point in the discussion, questions become specific.
The difficulty with such comparisons lies in developing comparable models in terms of the nature and size of challenges.
No two societies are identical, nor are their problems similar.
In the final analysis, therefore, the analyst is compelled to treat each model as sui generis; lessons from such comparisons, therefore, are at best of a generalised nature.
This necessarily brings us to the case of India and to seek answers to the six questions in relation to India.
The instruments available to Members are Questions and debates or discussions under various rules of procedure.
Data for the period 2003-04 to 2013 shows that the Ministry of Defence answered 2857 questions in Rajya Sabha and 3599 in Lok Sabha.
In addition, a few discussions were also held.
The Committee can avail of expert opinion or opinion of the public as inputs in its reports.
Ministers are not members of the Standing Committees and, by convention, are not required to appear before it.
In the present (15th) Lok Sabha, the DSC has so far made twenty reports on different aspects of the responsibilities entrusted to the Ministry of Defence.
Another corrective could be a provision for attendance by Ministers since this would lend greater political credence to the work of the Committee.
The question of the comprehensiveness of the policy-making process and of the synergy between the military and civil inputs into it continues to the subject of much discussion.
More recently, the Naresh Chandra Task Force on National Security has examined the matter further.
I am personally not knowledgeable enough to comment on the desirability or otherwise of creating new institutions on the pattern of what exist elsewhere.
Secrecy is often a device to hide inadequacy.
In view of the seamlessness of civil and military inputs that go into the formulation and operationalsiation of national security strategy, strict compartmentalization of civil and military dimensions of national security is erroneous.
Instead, the need of the moment is a more integrated approach with dynamic oversight of the elected political leadership.
There is no reason why different disciplines cannot be interactive and cooperative in pursuit of a common objective.
It has been argued in many quarters that apart from periodic net assessments, we in India do not have a formal document in the shape of a National Security Strategy document to project officially a comprehensive approach to security.
The intention, I presume, is to go beyond Chapter 1 of the Annual Report of the Ministry of Defence.
Much of the discussion on this pertains only to traditional or military security and unavoidably touching upon developing challenges and evolving capacities and strategies.
And yet, as Professor Kanti Bajpai puts it, ‘the key argument is that ultimately state security is for individual security.
Political structures have to be effective in dealing with both internal and external threats to national security.
Territorial integrity can be protected by creating strong, well equipped and modern armed forces, para-military and civil police institutions, which can protect the country against external aggression, armed rebellion and internal disturbances.
This is true of India also.
Rampant poverty, rising inequality, unemployment, illiteracy, discrimination based on religion, caste, creed, language, race or ethnicity etc.
These problems do not have a purely military solution and also cannot be treated merely as a law and order issue.
They require robust political intervention aimed at seeking solutions within the constitutional framework.
Keeping our neighbourhood peaceful and stable is also essential for pursuit of our developmental goals.
Diplomacy has a critical role in building international partnerships for confronting trans-national threats and in promoting interests.
The attainment of these goals in a coordinated manner depends critically on an effective and responsive political structure.
I thank you for inviting me today.
I am happy to be here today.
This Conference touches the core of the political debate in many modern societies and is reflective of the distance we have travelled from the classical dictum that power and authority is indivisible.
The theme of the Conference emphasizes plurality in its typology.
Federations and local authorities with different characteristics predate modern times and came about in response to a variety of impulses.
In our democratic age, it is readily accepted that both federalism and democracy – albeit in distinct ways – are mechanisms for managing diversity and involve restraining and tempering the exercise of power.
Both the older and newer forms of federalism are practiced in many lands and it is estimated that about 40 percent of the world’s population live in federated states.
The theoretical foundations of the perception that legitimate authority must be federal were laid by advocates of political pluralism in the early decades of the 20th century.
Federalism requires flexibility, cooperation, tolerance and accommodation of political, societal and economic complexities.
In this regard, we need fresh ideas and new suggestions from scholars and practitioners.
This same argument holds for localism.
There are, however, areas of human activity that are best attended to with the direct participation of citizens most affected by it.
Their participation in the formulation and implementation of policies relating to these, and seeking greater accountability, therefore is desirable in practical as well as ethical terms.
In reaction, there is evidence of a resurgence of militant nationalism and identity-based parochialism that threatens the concept of unity in diversity, shows scant respect for different cultures and value systems, and other ways of life.
An obvious question therefore comes to mind.
Given the vastness of the country and its breathtaking diversity, the framers of the Constitution of India created a structure of government with a strong centre; with three legislative lists, and all residuary powers resting with the Union.
This was purposefully described as a ‘Union of States’ having features of both the federal and the unitary systems.
In the process, ‘an unprecedented and unconventional expansion of the federal principle’ is taking place and is yet to achieve equilibrium.
In the meantime, the expression ‘cooperative federalism’ has gained currency in political vocabulary.
This audience knows that Part XI of the Constitution (Articles 245 to 263) relates to relations between Union and the States and Article 263 specifically provides for coordination between States through an Inter-State Council.
The constitutional scheme of things for both these levels is thus not only in place but also operative.
The question is of their efficacy.
In the past twenty five years, there have been three occasions to examine or review the functioning of these structures.
The Sarkaria Commission in 1988, the Venkatachaliah Commission in 2002 and the Punchi Commission in 2010 expressed views, inter alia, on devolution and decentralization.
The Chairman of the Expert Committee, Shri Mani Shankar Aiyer, is among the distinguished participants in this Conference and will have much to say on all aspects of the subject.
A second aspect of localism relates to urban self-government.
The deficiencies of the Urban Local Bodies (ULB) in our system span a range of areas, principally relating to the multiplicity of organizations and overlapping amongst them, lack of functional and financial powers and inadequate monitoring of service delivery.
We spend $ 17 per capita per year on urban infrastructure when most benchmarks suggest a requirement of S100.
A first step in this direction was taken in December 2004 through the National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) with the objective of improving urban infrastructure and governance and provision of basic public services to the urban poor.
I am confident that your discussions and the outcomes of this Conference will help us in finding the right path forward.
I am confident that its deliberations would bring forth ideas and insights that would further the debate.
I wish the Conference all success.
I am very happy to be here today for this ceremony to present the national awards to deserving young students from all over the country under the Department of Science & Technology’s national programme ‘Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research’ (INSPIRE).
The objective of INSPIRE programme is to attract talent to the study of science at an early age and help to build the required critical human resource pool for strengthening and expanding the science & technology system and research and development base in the country.
In this age, the steadily increasing pace of technological change based on scientific research and development has brought about profound changes in many areas of human endeavour – such as healthcare, energy, agriculture, information technology etc.
In the future, science and technology will be critical in finding answers to these seemingly intractable challenges.
In India, since independence, there has been an emphasis on investment in research and development leading to creation of substantial capacity and capabilities in science and technology.
Our nuclear and space programmes, Information Technology & Communications sector, automotive and pharmaceuticals industries, growth in agriculture production etc.
Our human resources are outstanding and given a fair chance and adequate resources, they can achieve almost the impossible.
Our relative position with respect to scientific publications has improved from 15th in 2003 to 9th in 2010.
Our science output has reached 3 per cent of the global output in 2010.
However, much more needs to be done.
As the country continues on the path of rapid, more inclusive and sustainable growth, we will have to do considerably better in the field of science and technology, not just for our own development but also to keep pace with the rest of the world.
At present, we fall short of global standards in science and technology and research and development in many areas.
India’s share of top 1 per cent impact-making scientific publications in the world is only 0.5 per cent, as of 2006, less than those of other Asian countries like China and South Korea.
Inventiveness in our basic science, as indicated by creation of intellectual property, is low.
India’s innovation system ranking varies between 50 and 60 among the nations.
The country continues to face major challenges of economic growth and development with equity and social justice, food security, education and healthcare, energy security, efficient water management etc.
These can be addressed substantially by promoting quality science & technology, showing greater inventiveness and innovation.
It would require investing adequately in knowledge systems, infrastructure and trained human resources related to scientific research and technological development, not only by the Government but to an equal degree by the private corporate sector.
India’s comparative advantage rests in its youth and students, who constitute the overwhelming majority of the population.
We must harness this valuable asset in order to achieve our developmental goals.
I congratulate all the young friends who have been recognized today for their achievements.
It is their initiative, dedication and hard work that has won them the awards.
I urge them to continue working hard with the same degree of commitment, perseverance and integrity and I am confident that success will find them.
Our young awardees have made an excellent start on a journey towards becoming the leaders of tomorrow in the field of science and technology.
I wish you all the best for the future, in which success or failure is in your hands.
I thank the organizers for inviting me.
I am happy to be back in Patna, and on the occasion of the first convocation of the Central University of Bihar.
Coming to this ancient land of wisdom and knowledge, of Nalanda and Vikramshila, is a matter of intellectual satisfaction, more so today when we award degrees to the first batch of graduating students since the University was set up in 2009.
I take this opportunity to extend my felicitations to them.
It is expected to evolve new formats that will link education to social and economic development, for the welfare of the people of this state and the country.
Amongst these are the Masters programmes in Development Studies, Biotechnology, Bio-informatics, Computer Science, Environmental Science, Communications & Media Studies etc.
A university builds its reputation largely on relevant and innovative courses, quality teaching and incisive research.
A faculty that inspires to bring out the best in the students is integral to the effort.
I am confident that in the years ahead, the state of Bihar will get a boost on its journey of progress and prosperity from the contributions of this University and its alumni.
This work in the service of the nation should not be seen as a charitable gesture.
It is a social, economic and moral imperative.
A well educated population, equipped with the relevant knowledge and appropriate skills is essential for economic and social development in this age.
Education is a potent tool for socioeconomic mobility and a key input for building an equitable and just society.
It provides skills and competencies for economic well being.
It strengthens democracy by imparting to citizens the tools needed for effective participation in the governance process.
In a diverse society like ours, education acts as an integrative force, imparting values that foster social cohesion, communal harmony and national identity.
In the rapidly changing and integrated world of today when scientific and technological development and innovation are bringing a seminal transformation in human civilisation, much focus has been on education and skill development to match the demand for high quality and trained human resources generated by this unprecedented progress in human society.
In the Indian context, quality, affordability and accessibility have been adopted as guiding mantra for the development of our national education system.
II Integration with the world of the twenty first century will also be contingent on subscribing to and practicing the globally accepted value system relating to governance.
One important aspect of it that I wish to touch upon today relates to the protection and promotion of human rights.
They are based on the principle of respect for the individual and the fundamental assumption that each person is a moral and rational being who deserves to be treated with dignity.
The core principles of human rights have been reiterated in numerous international human rights conventions, declarations, and resolutions.
These were formalised in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights adopted by the UN General Assembly in December 1948.
It covers the entire gamut of human rights which are basic to human dignity and freedom.
Twenty more conventions prohibit specific abuses such as torture and genocide and protect specific vulnerable populations such as refugees, women, and children.
Other conventions cover racial discrimination, prevention of genocide, political rights of women, prohibition of slavery and torture.
Together they are reflective of universal validity, relevance and acceptance, as the accepted norm for human conduct in modern, civilised societies.
India has adhered to all of them, but is yet to ratify some, including the Convention against Torture.
Taking cognisance of the importance of protecting and promoting human rights in building a developed nation state, the founding fathers of our Republic enshrined in the Constitution of India most human rights contained in these basic documents on human rights.
This is evident from the contents of Part III and IV of the Constitution.
These were supplemented by the Protection of Human Rights Act 1994 and many decisions of the higher judiciary particularly in the past two decades.
Significant correctives have been made.
Amongst them are abolition of abhorrent practises like untouchability, female foeticide, discrimination on the basis of work and descent.
Each of these has been made punishable under law.
Affirmative action in favour of marginalised and deprived sections of society to ameliorate their lot and empower them has been undertaken and made justiciable for enforcement.
Bonded labourers have been freed and rehabilitated.
Judicial pronouncements have opened up new avenues for the realization of justice, and corrupt public officials and policemen have been prosecuted.
Six decades on, the requisite intellectual, legal and institutional framework for protection and promotion of human rights is in place in our country.
They relate both to violation or denial of rights by state agencies and to violation or denial of rights by individuals and groups to individuals and groups.
The weak – individual or group - is invariably the victim.
It would suffice to mention the typology of human rights violations.
The annual and periodic reports of the Commission give details of individual cases and of the corrective action taken.
The NHRC has also taken initiatives to spread human rights literacy in the country.
In this day and age, it is important to take into account how the world sees us.
The Human Rights Council of the United Nations has established a mechanism for reviewing the state of human rights in Member States.
Known as the Universal Periodic Review, it undertook this exercise in relation to India most recently in 2012.
Many new issues have become part of the human rights agenda and will remain crucial in the coming decades.
The other is to respond to them in a mature fashion.
In a vibrant and robust democracy like ours, there is no shame in acknowledging the faults and the lacunae that exist in the policies and institutions pertaining to human rights.
Our point of reference should be the Constitution of India and the principles, rights and duties enunciated therein.
On this basis, we are duty bound, legally and morally, to address these challenges through firm and unbiased corrective actions by the state, civil society and other stakeholders.
It is, and should be viewed as, a societal duty.
It is here that education in human rights culture becomes critically important in educational institutions.
We as a nation have to awaken our collective conscience.
We also need to strive for global standards.
I am confident that through the collective efforts of the students, faculty and staff, the Central University of Bihar will become a shining symbol of unity, harmony and tolerance in this region and beyond.
Try and become ambassadors of peace, goodwill and harmony between communities and regions in our great country.
I thank the University for inviting me today.
I am happy to have been invited for this ceremony to inaugurate the “Tripura State Museum, Ujjayanta Palace” at this impressive building in Agartala.
I convey my warm greetings and good wishes to the people and Government of Tripura on this joyous occasion, as we dedicate this Museum to the people of state and to the nation.
The State of Tripura, nestled in this beautiful northeast region of our country, has a glorious history and rich cultural heritage which dates back to earliest of times.
The region finds mention in the ancient epics such as the Mahabharata and in the edicts of Emperor Ashoka, which certifies the antiquity of the land.
The State has abundant historical and cultural richesse which deserves to be shared with the rest of the country and beyond.
Given the cultural exchanges and intermingling of various cultures of the sub-continent and beyond over the centuries, this is a commendable step forward.
The Museum is also expected to serve as a centre for active research and cultural activities which will link culture and heritage to broader aspect of human development in the present day context.
These are welcome steps and must be applauded.
Good museums are also an invaluable source of history and heritage of a people and their civilization.
They also provide wealth of information and required resources for academics, researchers and students of history, apart from helping the general economy by generating revenue and employment through promotion of tourism.
It is in this context as well, that the Museum will serve the people of the state in the future.
I once again congratulate the Government of Tripura on this excellent initiative.
I thank the organizers for inviting me for this ceremony.
Jai Hind
I am happy to be here today to join Rashtrapati ji and Pradhan Mantri ji on this important national occasion.
I congratulate the award winners.
Their grit and determination in promoting the noble ideal of communal harmony is commendable.
The National Foundation for Communal Harmony was set up in the dark days of 1992 to promote some essential ingredients of our philosophy of governance.
In a mature society, both exercises have to be undertaken candidly.
The Background Paper lists six criteria for the awards.
The first of these is critical in itself and for the success of the other five.
It is “for discouraging communal ill-will and regional animosities and weaning the misguided elements of society from the path of violence.” The wording is significant.
The focus is on “discouraging” and “weaning” rather than on prohibition and eradication.
The harsh reality is that both communal ill-will and regional animosities are diseases of the mind.
They operate at the individual and the communitarian levels.
Often sections of citizen body are motivated by nefarious considerations, driven by paranoia, and an imagined otherness about other sections.
The Constitution enjoins us to secure fraternity.
We seem to fail in this.
The failure is at every level – governments, civil society, individuals.
Absence of harmony results in discord; discord disturbs social peace; absence of social peace impedes progress and development.
Jai Hind.
The occasion, and the preceding twelve months, mark the 125th anniversary of the legislative tradition initiated in the year 1888 by the then Travancore State.
The purpose of a legislative body is to deliberate, legislate, and seek accountability from the executive.
The records of the sessions of the Kerala Legislative Assembly indicate that this has been done in adequate measure.
This is a tribute to the commitment of generations of legislators, to the political awareness of the electorate and to their adherence to the principles of parliamentary democracy.
Another characteristic of Kerala’s political scene is its adherence to the classic pattern of two political combinations.
This is at variance with the fragmentation in evidence in many other states as also in the Centre.
And, of course, mention must be made of Kerala’s record of progressive legislation and its impressive, very impressive, achievements in the fields of education and health.
Located in the south-western corner of the country, Kerala can be looked up to as a model in many areas of national activity.
Our own parliamentary system of government is based on the British model; it has shaped our procedures and practices.
It follows that each must work and deliver in appropriate measure.
A failure to retain the requisite balance could result either in arbitrary governance by the executive or interference in its domain by the legislature.
A third dimension of this failure, visible from time to time, is reflected in what has come to be known as ‘judicial activism’.
Some distinguished jurists have commented recently on some of its implications.
Much has been said, and written, about our democracy.
This success is a tribute to the wisdom and maturity of our people.
That same maturity allows us to assess its performance in terms of the generally accepted bench marks relating to its elective, deliberative, and governance aspects.
The experience of fifteen General Elections has shed light on some systemic and procedural deficiencies in our system.
The latter are the subject of a task force set up by the Ministry of Law.
Less attention has been paid to the former.
This figure went down to 58.09 percent in 1957.
In the 13th, 14th, and 15th general elections in 1999, 2004, and 2009 respectively, it was 60.03, 75.87 and 82.68 respectively.
The situation is reportedly no better in many Assembly elections.
This is yet to be done.
In this context a number of questions come to mind: A look at the statistical data answers the first two questions.
In the period 1952-1961, the annual average of sittings of the Lok Sabha was 124.2 and of the Rajya Sabha 90.5.
In the next decade, it was 116.3 and 98.5 respectively.
This is reflected in the allocation of time for legislation or deliberation on issues of public concern and the accountability of the executive.
Record of many decades also shows that the notional time allocation is different from the time actually utilised for conduct of business.
The reason for this is that uniquely Indian contribution to parliamentary practice known as disruption.
It has been a source of concern for many years now and is inviting public ire.
Conferences of Presiding Officers in May and September 1992 addressed the problem as did the Golden Jubilee Session of the Lok Sabha in 1997.
Solemn commitments were made unanimously on each occasion; passage of time was to show that neither the solemnity nor the unanimity had the slightest impact on actual behaviour in legislative chambers.
Yet another effort, on a wider scale, was made in November 2001.
It also recommended ‘automatic suspension’ for specified periods of Members guilty of grave misconduct.
None of this was acted upon except for the incorporation in 2001 of automatic suspension in Lok Sabha (but not Rajya Sabha) rules.
It has been used for the first time only in recent weeks.
In the meantime, and notwithstanding solemn commitments, time continues to be lost in disruptions and at the expense of listed business both of accountability and of legislation.
Ours is an open society in which the Constitution guarantees the freedom of expression.
This includes the right to argue, to debate, and to agitate.
Forgotten is the simple truth, applicable to all citizens including legislators, is that rules are to be observed, not discarded or subverted.
It is relevant to recall that such a scenario was not contemplated by the makers of our Constitution.
In fact, the contrary was prescribed.
It would be in step with the practice in other parliamentary democracies and would not single us out as an aberration.
IV There is an imperative need for correctives in other areas of work too.
Clearly, the scope for improvement beckons us even as we celebrate our successes.
I wish the Kerala legislative Assembly all success in its work of ensuring good governance and furthering the well being of the people of the state.
A University for Our Times It has been my privilege to be the Chancellor of this university, famous for its work and alumni, for almost a decade.
I confess I have followed the dictum that a Chancellor should be seen infrequently and heard rarely.
This is one of those rare occasions, of convocation, when I get the opportunity to congratulate the Vice Chancellor, faculty, staff and students for the good work that is being done here.
I am very happy that the University has decided to celebrate the singular achievements and services of some individuals by award of honoris causa degrees and the Rattan honours.
I take this opportunity to share with you some thoughts on the importance of universities in our society and the requirements for the universities to play that role.
This trend of thinking, essentially utilitarian in a narrow sense, is not uncommon in our times.
Plato’s Academia and Aristotle’s Lyceum in Athens in 4th century BC, Nalanda in India in 5th century AD, Al Azhar in Egypt in 952 and Bologna in Italy in 1088 were in different senses precursors of modern universities.
Cardinal Newman in 1852 described a university as ‘a seat of wisdom, a light to the world, a minister of the faith, an Alma Mater of the rising generation.
While there is no argument against applied research; and the need to commercialize such research, we must also accept that many of our present challenges require paradigm-shifts and disruptive convergent innovation.
Over the long haul, invention is the mother of necessity – changing not only what is possible, but what we regard as essential.
We need to recognize that ‘risk, waste and failure are all essential parts of the process’.
History is at its most illuminating when written with the full consciousness of what people wrongly expected to happen.
Even in the domain of technology, future developments only a few years away have been shrouded from contemporary eyes.
University education and intellectual enrichment must not be construed solely or even primarily as a path to employment.
These two functions should reinforce one another.
In recent times, there is a pre-occupation with technological research as against research in pure and social sciences.
Often, questions are raised about the importance, and benefits of social research to present requirements.
Situating the relevance of contemporary social enquiry is complex and multifaceted.
It is of paramount importance, especially for societies like ours that are in a transition process.
The other important role of social research is in questioning and deconstructing ‘social and cultural mythologies’ that circulate and proliferate in any society, especially during phases of change and uncertainty.
The period of rapid transition in India, particularly, in the last 25 years, offers a particularly fertile climate for such mythologies- which are often harmful for liberal values and the exercise of democracy.
The ‘national interest’ in this scheme is constitutional rule.
It should be a place for the diffusion and extension of knowledge.
It enables each of us to recognize the strengths and weaknesses in our thinking.
A University must foster an environment that prizes intellectual freedom.
Except in cases of illegal conduct or violence, a University should never seek to silence or influence faculty members or students to adopt or renounce any particular position.
This is to be done by examining different ideas in an environment that encourages free and scrupulous debate.
The University, in discharge of its duties, has the responsibility of speaking out without the fear of intimidation; and to give offense, even at the cost of inviting protests.
This tolerance always has the potential to conflict with other virtues and causes, so it needs to be defended repeatedly and vigilantly.
We need to revisit these commitments today because we are again in a climate that questions the value and scope of academic freedom.
Recent events in our own country have shown that there is much confusion about what a university should or should not be.
As the Chancellor of the University, I urge you to proceed purposefully in this direction.
Jai Hind.
Rashtrapati Pranab Mukherjee, or Pranab Da, as he is affectionately known, has had a long and distinguished career in public life.
In his parliamentarian avatar, Shri Mukherjee strove to raise the level of debates and discussions in Parliament by erudite articulation on issues of public importance.
His parliamentary performance earned him the Outstanding Parliamentarian Award for the year 1997.
He held important Ministerial charges in Government and played a significant role in shaping the policies for progress and inclusive development over the years.
In representing India on a number of international fora, he was the consummate diplomat.
His expertises in economic and financial matters, similarly, have been much sought after.
He was rated one of the best five Finance Ministers of the world in 1984 and was declared ‘Finance Minister of the Year for Asia’ in 2010.
In his long career, he has been an astute administrator and consensus builder in various capacities.
In recognition of his valuable services, a grateful nation conferred upon him the Padma Vibhushan in 2008.
Shri Mukherjee combines the qualities of an erudite scholar with those of a seasoned politician.
His views and pronouncements on issues of national and international importance have enhanced the stature of the high offices held by him.
From the highest pedestal, he has, on several occasions, urged citizens to rededicate themselves to the cause of upholding the democratic values.
As he put it, “Our tradition has always celebrated the ‘argumentative’ Indian; not the ‘intolerant’ Indian.
Shri Mukherjee’s rich political legacy holds valuable lessons for us and will guide a future generation in public life.
Today, as we bid farewell to Rashtrapati ji, I wish him good health and long life.
Jai Hind!
If memory serves me right, Tolstoy begins one of his novels with a remarkably simple statement.
The contestation takes place in the realm of historiography, culture, education and contemporary politics.
The volume before us is a collection of papers and articles that Prof. Panikkar has written over years.
Together, they sustain and reinforce his position as an outstanding public intellectual of our times.
Anniversaries are occasions for recollections as well as introspection.
The first is celebratory: the second conducive to a reiteration of faith.
It is on the latter that I propose to focus today.
The philosophical underpinning of Swami Vivekananda is as important as his social purpose.
He was an Indian, a Hindu, a Vedantist, a leading light of the Ramakrishna Mission, a social reformer, an activist who passionately wished to transform the Indian social reality in all its dimensions.
His agenda was comprehensive, his purpose revolutionary.
To do justice to him, each aspect of this agenda, and his methodology, needs to be recalled.
Some aspects of it have been appropriated and misappropriated and remain controversial to this day.
Vivekananda used the Hindu idiom to be understood.
His objective, however, was not to sanctify the social reality but to change it, and to take it to its logical purpose.
He argued instead that the proof of one religion depends on the proof of all the rest and that if one religion is true, all others must be true.
It was this conviction which led Vivekananda to preach the need for harmonising the essence of all religions and then to turn this perception into a social reality.
It was this advocacy of religious pluralism that led Vivekananda to his vision of India visualised as “a junction of the two great systems, Hinduism and Islam – Vedanta brain and an Islam body”.
His letter of June 10, 1898 from Almora spells out the rationale of this perception.
From such an approach flowed his social purpose.
A disciple of his, Swami Ranganathananda of the Ramakrishna Mission, has written that “Vivekananda was the first to point out the harm that has been done to the spiritual and moral personality of our people by economic backwardness and social division.
Involuntary poverty, to him, is unspiritual and immoral.” Vivekananda was against exploitation and privilege and saw socialism as a possible remedy to India’s problems.
The two complement each other.
The absence of one is inherently disruptive of the other.
The attainment of both paves the way for that higher humanity which is the essence of all religions.
I thank Arun Jaitley ji, and the organisers of this function, for inviting me today.
I am happy to be here today to confer the First Sree Narayana Guru Global Secular & Peace Award 2013 on a distinguished fellow citizen, Dr Shashi Tharoor, a friend of many years.
Dr. Shashi Tharoor is a multifaceted personality who has excelled in his various avatars of a cerebral scholar, prolific writer, a brilliant orator, an international civil servant of repute, Member of Parliament and now Minister of State in the Union Government.
Secularism and democracy are the fundamental principles on which our republic is founded.
They are enshrined in the preamble of our Constitution.
So are the principles of justice social, economic and political; liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; equality of status and of opportunity, among others.
Our founding fathers were cognisant of the reality that in our ancient and diverse land, the fundamental principles of democracy and secularism were indispensable for building a united, modern and plural India.
I commend the Sree Naraya Dharma Samithi for their good work in carrying forward the noble message of Sree Narayana Guru and doing concrete work for the upliftment and welfare of the common people, especially the marginalised and deprived sections of society.
I congratulate Dr. Shashi Tharoor for receiving the First Sree Narayan Guru Global Secular & Peace Secular Award.
I wish him many more years of service in the cause of the nation.
I thank the organisers for inviting me and wish them all success.
Jai Hind
I am happy to be here today for the inauguration of the International Conference on ‘Alliance for Literacy, Peace and Development in South Asia’.
The occasion gives the opportunity to reiterate the centrality of literacy for peace, development and empowerment in South Asia.
This Conference is timely.
Tomorrow, we commemorate the International Literacy Day to recall, and reaffirm, that literacy is a basic human right and a fundamental entitlement of every human being.
I take this opportunity to welcome our distinguished guests from fellow SAARC countries and wish them a pleasant and fruitful stay in Delhi.
We are endowed with abundance of quality resources – human, natural and physical.
Some of our people are at the cutting edge of scientific and technological research and in the front ranks of the knowledge society the world over.
At the same time, our teeming millions continue to face daunting challenges of abject poverty, widespread ignorance, hunger, disease and homelessness.
The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation has been in existence for almost three decades but the physical and economic integration of our region has not progressed to the desired extent for various reasons.
We also have a shared history.
We enjoy strong cultural affinity based on vibrant exchange of peoples, goods and ideas amongst us over the centuries.
A common future of mutually beneficial cooperation and shared prosperity is the logical destination.
It is universally acknowledged that education and literacy are essential for eliminating poverty, reducing infant mortality, curbing population growth, achieving gender parity and ensuring sustainable development, peace and democracy.
South Asia is confronted by these very challenges.
Hence the importance of education and literacy in bringing about social and economic transformation of our societies cannot be overstated.
Former Secretary General of the United Nations Kofi Annan had rightly observed that ‘education is a human right with immense power to transform.
It is in this context that the theme of this Conference is pertinent and timely.
Education in South Asia suffers from the twin problem of lack of access and quality.
In majority of the SAARC Member Countries, enrolment of children of primary school age has only recently crossed the global level.
The problem is compounded by high levels of dropout.
Thus literacy rates remain low.
Situation at the secondary and tertiary level is no better and in some respects, are even worse.
Even those children leaving schools after completing their education are found wanting in the quality of their skills and relevance of their learning, which makes them unemployable in the market.
Specifically, Around 398 million adults, almost half of world’s illiterate population, live in South Asia.
Women and girls constitute nearly two-thirds of the illiterate adult population, making the magnitude of the problem even greater.
Enrolled children must also complete primary school to master, at a minimum, basic literacy and numeracy skills.
But in South Asia, one third of students enrolled in the first grade will leave school before reaching the last grade of the primary school, primarily due to poverty.
The Heads of State or Government of SAARC countries at the Ninth Summit at Male´ in 1997 acknowledged that illiteracy was one of the major causes impeding the development of the vast human resources of South Asia and a major factor contributing to the region’s economic backwardness and social imbalance.
While some cooperation in education sector has been undertaken under the umbrella of SAARC, a lot more needs to be done before benefits of such cooperation bear fruit for the betterment and welfare of our people.
Factual data puts matters in perspective.
The UN’s Millennium Development Goal Number 2 required achieving universal primary education by 2015.
As against this, developing regions have made impressive strides in expanding access to primary education, with the adjusted net enrolment rate growing from 83 per cent in 2000 to 90 per cent in 2011.
In 2011, 57 million children of primary school age world over were out of school, down from 102 million in 2000.
South Asia’s progress in this regard has been better.
The adjusted net enrolment rate of children of primary school age increased from 78 per cent to 93 per cent between 2000 and 2011.
Almost half the reduction in the global number of children out of school can be attributed to our region, where the number of such children fell from a high of 38 million in 2000 to 12 million in 2011.
The last two decades have witnessed steady progress of literacy among both youth and adults.
In South Asia, the literacy rate in the age group 15-24 years the figure increased from 60 to 81 percent between 1990 and 2011.
Thus, at this rate, gender parity in literacy is a distinct possibility in the future.
Literacy, peace and development are inextricably interlinked.
Literacy is a necessary condition for peace to prevail and to tackle the very roots of conflicts arising due to ignorance, intolerance, economic hardship, social injustice, political oppression.
More importantly, illiteracy undermines democratic processes, promotes intolerance, sectarianism and discrimination.
On the other hand, literacy promotes social cohesion, intercultural understanding, tolerance and mutual respect.
A literate citizenry is indispensable to participative governance and democracy as it equips the individual to effectively engage with democratic institutions, make independent political choices and exercise citizenship rights.
It stimulates healthy informed dialogue and debate that are so crucial to democratic societies.
An important aspect is the literacy amongst women and their educational advancement.
It is critical for their social and economic empowerment, greater participation in public life and gender equality.
This has a moral imperative apart from the constitutional one.
Establishment of knowledge-based societies on the foundation of education and literacy is an essential to prepare us to face these emerging challenges in this century.
Excellencies, In the Indian development model, literacy has been given the highest attention in our policies.
It is recognised that education is the single most important instrument for social and economic transformation.
A well educated population adequately equipped with knowledge and skill is not only essential to support economic growth, but is also a precondition for growth to be inclusive.
It is for this reason that literacy and adult literacy programmes have always been on the development agenda in India.
It was this conviction that led to the inclusion of Right to Education as a justiciable fundamental right in our Constitution.
This guarantees 8 years of free and compulsory schooling to all children in the age group 6-14.
It has been implemented since April 2010.
A number of steps have been taken by the Government to promote total literacy and universalise elementary and secondary education in the country.
It is envisioned that strengthening the two ends of the spectrum, namely, elementary education and higher/technical education would help in meeting the objectives of expansion, inclusion and excellence in education.
One such programme, the National Literacy Mission, launched by Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in 1986, galvanised the country, making it a mass movement involving civil society, NGOs and ordinary citizens, besides the government.
The results have been noteworthy.
Between 1981 and 2011, as the National Literacy Mission gathered momentum, literacy rate has increased from a mere 44 per cent to 74 per cent of the population.
However, much more needs to be done.
Having 26% of our population still classified as illiterate in the 21st century is unacceptable.
We also have regional variations.
This also has to be addressed with urgency.
The National Literacy Mission has emerged as an important tool in our development strategy to promote social inclusion through education.
To give fillip to attainment of this objective, a new variant of the NLM ‘Saakshar Bharat’ or (Literate India) programme was initiated.
This has grown to become the world’s largest adult literacy programme, aiming to impart literacy to 60 million non-literate women and 10 million non-literate men by 2017.
So far, 20 million adults have been declared literate under this programme.
The good work being done under ‘Saakshar Bharat’ has been recognized by experts and it is being conferred UNESCO’s King Sejong Literacy Prize for this year.
I congratulate all the stakeholders involved in the programme and wish them continued success.
India is committed to strengthen and broaden partnerships with governments, private sector and civil society to promote the cause of literacy in South Asia.
We are ready to share our experiences and expertise in this field with all our neighbours and friends.
I take this opportunity to call for enhanced cooperation in the field of literacy and education among the South Asian countries.
Nelson Mandela called education the most powerful weapon which you can use to change the world.
I am happy to be here today at this function to release the Delhi Human Development Report 2013.
I thank the organisers for having invited me for this ceremony.
In any democracy, a government which exists by the sovereign will of the people has the solemn responsibility to effectively discharge its duty to promote, among other things, the social and economic welfare and progress of the people, in a safe and secure environment.
Such an evaluation is also helpful in future planning.
It is in this context that the initiative of the Delhi Government to prepare the second Delhi Human Development Report on the theme'Improving Lives Promoting Inclusion' is an important and welcome exercise.
Seven years after the first report in 2006, it gives an opportunity to measure the progress achieved in the human development agenda.
People from almost all parts of the country and from all strata of society come to the NCT and contribute to the city's economy and society.
This migration of skilled and less skilled labour also pose challenges.
Some of these have been addressed in the report.
The Governance structure in Delhi is also unique.
While the state has an elected Legislative Assembly and Council of Ministers led by the Chief Minister, the role of the Union Government in some crucial sectors of administration, such as police and urban development, is predominant.
This administrative arrangement presents a different set of challenges for governance.
Human development in traditional terms was concerned with per capita income, education and health.
The scope of the term however has widened over time to encompass various other issues such as gender parity, human security and access to basic facilities such as water, sanitation and housing.
I am happy to note that the Human Development Report 2013 looks at the human development situation within Delhi in detail, keeping in focus the disparities that exist across population groups.
It makes an assessment of the progress in bridging these disparities.
It is heartening that on most counts, the 2013 Report finds an improvement in the lives of the citizens of Delhi since the last assessment was done in the 2006.
It is mentioned that Delhi now has near universal electrification.
Many challenges, however, remain and need to be urgently addressed.
Allow me to mention some of these.
In areas such as employment, education, health, housing or provision of basic services, access is disparate for different segments of the society in the capital.
Despite the affluence, there are groups of people, across income brackets and types of settlements, who suffer from extreme vulnerability.
Some are even deprived of many basic civic amenities.
A levelling of living standards across different segments of the population would depend critically on improved access to basic amenities, especially water and sanitation services.
The gender gap in work participation and literacy levels has to be bridged at the earliest.
Much more needs to be done for pre-school and primary school facilities in localities inhabited by the less privileged and the minorities.
The issue of safety and security of citizens has been agitating the public mind in recent times.
The deficit in terms of a real and perceived lack of safety and security in public spaces affects the daily lives of all citizens, especially women, children and seniors.
Another challenge is the increasing informalisation of employment, which means that an increasing number of workers in the informal sector are without any form of social security or protection.
This needs to be redressed.
Although the access to public health facilities has improved, it is still far short of acceptable standards.
In this regard, it is my hope that all stakeholders will look carefully at the conclusions in the Report.
These are It is my expectation that the Delhi Human Development Report 2013 will engender a healthy debate that would contribute to policy planning to make the city and its facilities more inclusive for its citizens.
I conclude with a word on citizen behaviour and civility.
Honest introspection would reveal a noticeable deficit.
Jai Hind
On behalf of the Government and people of India, I extend a warm welcome to your Excellency and to the members of your delegation.
We welcome you as a close friend of India and as a statesman who has made significant contribution to Afghanistan and to our bilateral relationship, in the last decade as Vice President.
Our shared cultural traditions have been enriched by this interaction.
A part of our very first Vedic text, the Rig Veda, is said to have been composed in Afghanistan.
We have shared the pain of the Afghan people caused by years of conflict and destruction.
Terrorism, a menace for us all, nevertheless threatens Afghanistan even more directly.
We have also faced the consequences of a great land like yours, being used as a safe haven for training terrorists.
We know that the fight against terrorism is not an easy one but we are also convinced that given the political will and determination, we can overcome this challenge.
The progress in building democratic structures, various institutions of governance, progress in the spheres of health, education, women empowerment and achievements in the field of economic activities are commendable.
I am happy that our partnership has become multi-dimensional as captured in the Strategic Partnership Agreement signed between our two countries in October 2011.
The Agreement articulates the future areas of cooperation between the two countries in diverse spheres, and India remains committed to implement the Agreement in its true spirit.
I am happy to be here today for the Golden Jubilee Celebrations of the Ecumenical Christian Centre and the commemoration of the Birth Centenary of its visionary founder, Reverend Dr. M.A.
His work in raising social awareness against the ills afflicting our society was noteworthy.
The Ecumenical Christian Centre was established in 1963 by the late Reverend Thomas with the vision of promoting the idea of fundamental unity of mankind.
Over a period of time, the Centre developed into a meeting place of people of all religious and political views.
I am happy to note that the ECC has adopted this wider concept of ecumenism as its guiding philosophy.
It has endeavored to promote the idea of unity of different faiths and humanity and the integration of creation, through its multifaceted work, oriented towards the welfare of the people and the country.
Courses conducted by the ECC’s National Citizen Academy and the Vicharodaya College on social, economic and political issues have helped generate awareness and impart knowledge among the people on problems confronting the country.
In addition, the Centre, through its community development programmes, which concentrate on primary health, literacy and social awareness, provides socio-economic and medical assistance to the deprived and marginalized sections of society, irrespective of caste, gender or creed.
The ECC has also rendered much appreciated services in promotion of communal harmony, gender empowerment and protection of human rights of vulnerable sections of our society.
He also preached the importance of selfless service and sacrifice in the cause of fellow beings.
We can never forget these contributions.
I am myself a product of a school run by Irish Brothers in Simla and of a college run by Jesuits in Kolkata.
It is in this glorious tradition of service before self that the ECC has established itself as an important institution which has rendered invaluable service in the cause of nation building and development.
I wish the ECC success and spiritual satisfaction in its work.
Jai Hind !
Your reputation, Vice President, travelled ahead of your arrival last evening.
You have been described as a moderate pragmatist and a fundamentally happy person.
Relations between nations, Excellencies, are mostly reflective of a complex set of considerations pertaining to values and interests.
The two do not always converge; they may at times even diverge.
Wishing to be friends, it is said, is quick work but friendship is a slow ripening fruit that requires diligent tending.
Happily for our two countries the areas of agreement are considerable and expanding.
They are premised on shared values of liberty, constitutionalism, Rule of Law, democracy, tolerance and promotion of diversity.
We both believe that discussion is an indispensable preliminary to wise action.
Remarkable progress, Vice President, has been registered in our bilateral cooperation.
We now have a tradition of political engagement at the highest level.
Your visit today adds to the edifice.
From an Indian perspective we have with the United States more defence cooperation, more strategic dialogues, more economic exchanges and more science and technology partnerships than with any other country.
Our cooperation in education and health is particularly note worthy, as is the prospect of even stronger ties in trade, investment, and energy.
Each of these furthers our own national effort for inclusive development.
Peace in the world and in our own region is a pre-requisite for sustained and sustainable development.
Threats to peace, many in India’s immediate region, are the greatest impediments to progress.
Countering threat to peace is one aspect of our cooperation; equally important and inseparable from it is promotion of stability and widening the global arc of prosperity.
Your visit and your own long standing personal commitment, Vice President, has contributed to this endeavour.
It has been a pleasure meeting you.
I candidly admit that my reason for coming here this evening is somewhat subjective.
The subject itself is enticing; what is more, it takes me back to a less complicated world when I had the license to perambulate unchecked in the lanes and by-lanes of the world of thoughts.
Lord Bhiku Parekh is a political thinker of great eminence and this initiative of setting up an Institute of Indian Thought is certainly timely.
I find the expression epistemic injustice referred to in Professor Bhargava’s paper to be a fascinating one.
Here, a word of caution would be relevant.
Writing about political concepts of ancient India in 1927, Narayan Chandra Bandyopadhyaya of Calcutta University referred to the difficulty of terminological equivalence and the ideas connoted by them.
He cautioned against reading “Western ideas into our history”.
The same holds for the medieval period of Indian history.
The 14th century historian Ziauddin Barani analysed the working of the institutions of Delhi Sultanate and enunciated a theory of monarchy emanating from them.
Akbar amplified them in good measure and added perceptions that promoted tolerance and social harmony.
Above all, and away from statecraft, social values were preached and practiced across the length and breadth of the land.
The emphasis was on accommodation, not on rejection.
At each stage in our long history, a doctrine of governance can be discerned.
The colonial hegemony and its rationale for social engineering to create a perception of self by the ‘natives’ certainly complicated matters.
The challenge now is to go into the interstices of earlier thought patterns to ascertain the nature of contents and their underlying values.
More recently and in the pre-independence period, many of our thinkers sought to bring about a renaissance but often faltered on what Tagore called the “social inadequacy” of our creed of nationalism.
Inaugurated by Jawahar Lal Nehru in 1963, the PGI is a centre of excellence for postgraduate medical education and research.
The Institute has played a pivotal role in development of new disciplines, specialization and super-specialization.
This has been fully achieved and is a matter of great satisfaction.
The mission statement of the PGI as engraved in its logo is "service to the community, care of the needy and research for the good of all ".
It not only sums up the role and objective of this Institute but it also aptly defines what should be the guiding principle of the entire medical fraternity.
By your exemplary work, you have set a fine example for others to follow.
I congratulate all those who have been associated with the PGI, in the past and present, and have contributed to its growth and fame.
A healthy population is a fundamental ingredient of inclusive development and nation building.
Universal access to quality health care is not just a social imperative; it is a necessary condition for economic progress and prosperity.
An unhealthy population imposes enormous social and economic costs on society and hinders sustainable development.
A relevant question can be posed here.
Our health care system today is a mix of public and private sector providers of health services.
Networks of health care facilities at the primary, secondary and tertiary level, run mainly by State Governments, provide free or very low cost medical services.
There is also an extensive private health care sector, covering the entire spectrum from individual doctors and their clinics, to general hospitals and super speciality hospitals.
The medical education system has expanded over time to become amongst the largest in the world.
Thanks to these efforts by the government and the private sector almost all indicators of health in the country have shown a positive trend.
The recent success in tackling polio is a good example.
High quality preventive and curative care is now available within the country for treating complicated diseases and performing complex procedures, which was not always the case in the past.
Despite these achievements, however, the overall health profile of our burgeoning population projects a disturbing picture.
According to a 2005 WHO study, the estimated economic loss to India due to deaths caused by all the diseases was 1.3% of its GDP.
Communicable diseases are also major causes of morbidity and mortality, leading to lower level of economic activity, missed educational opportunities and a direct negative impact on growth due to high health care costs.
Finally, inequity in healthcare access is a known fact.
The 12th Five year plan has recognized these challenges and many more.
Naturally, universal coverage would only be possible in a longer time-frame.
In this regard, I compliment your Institute for imparting medical education using information technology.
We would also need a lot more grass-roots research on epidemiology of our diseases, on infections, on nutrition and it's interaction with disease processes, simplified treatment regimens, and so on.
Jai Hind
Cultural heritage implies a shared bond with a community.
It represents our identity, our bond to the past, to our present, and our future.
Cultural heritage is not merely baggage from the past.
A tradition need not be revered and accepted merely because of its antiquity, nor must a tradition be abandoned merely because it is ancient.
Thus to assess the worth of any tradition, it is incumbent to study it, and for that, to preserve it.
The term “tradition” or “culture” can easily lend itself to idea of a single society and its temporal, linear extant.
Cultural boundaries are diffuse.
A global crisis faces humanity, marked by increasing mistrust and parochialism in our asymmetric world, environmental degradation and short-sightedness in policy-making.
Our right to enjoy the cultural artifacts, and to participate in the cultural life of the community, is reflected in UN’s 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
This prohibits illicit trafficking of artefacts and cultural objects; pillaging of archaeological sites; and destruction of historical buildings and monuments since it cause irreparable damage to the cultural heritage of a community.
These principles have been amplified in UNESCO’s various international conventions on the protection of cultural heritage.
While examining the boarder contours, its focus remains on Asian societies today.
Jai Hind.
Above all, he is an old friend.
And yet, a minor difficulty does intrude.
Most of what I am going to say this evening would therefore be in the category of borrowed wisdom.
Record shows that agriculture was not amongst the first productive activities of the human race.
Our remote ancestors were fruit gatherers before they took to domestication of animals and cultivation of land.
Having discovered the benefits of the latter, there was no turning back for at least ten thousand years.
The worth of agriculture has been understood at all times.
Kautilya observes in the Arthashastra that “cultivable land is better than mines because mines fill only the treasury while agricultural production fills both the treasury and the store houses.” This audience knows that agriculture is the backbone of our economy.
The sector’s contribution to the national GDP was 14.5 percent in 2010-11.
It accounts for 11% of our exports and is a vital source of raw material for a large number of industries.
An average Indian spends almost half of his/her total expenditure on food.
Accelerating the growth of agriculture production is therefore necessary to achieve an overall high GDP growth rate, meet the rising demand for food, and to ensure inclusiveness in our growth process.
Given that India is still home to the largest number of poor and malnourished people in the world, a higher priority to agriculture will help achieve these goals.
It is also clear that achieving a high rate of growth in overall GDP may not be sufficient in terms of poverty reduction unless agricultural growth accelerates and is inclusive in terms of people and regions of the country.
The experience from BRICS countries indicates that a one percentage growth in agriculture is at least two to three times more effective in reducing poverty than the same growth emanating from non-agriculture sectors.
The agricultural sector faces formidable challenges.
Dr. Alagh’s analysis of these questions is based on decades of research and experience.
I congratulate Dr. Alagh for his work.
While we are unique in terms of having a fundamental unity in this immense diversity, there is no denying that the diversity adds to the complexity of the myriad challenges which the nation faces.
This sub-national diversity can be explained to a degree by various natural, historical and contemporary factors.
Otherwise, economic and social inequity at sub-national scale will become a potent threat to our political union and could also disrupt societal harmony in our Republic.
It is in this context, that the contents of the India State Competitiveness Report 2013 become relevant and important.
It is on the basis of this Index that our awardees today have been chosen.
The Report defines competitiveness as the ability to use factors of production to derive maximum output per unit of input.
In an increasingly globalised and integrated world, competition from within and without is on the rise.
The Report should benefit policy makers, businesses, investors and researchers by providing them with an informed assessment of India’s growth and competitiveness in the past few years and the prospects for its overall competitiveness in the future.
We all recognize that each Indian state has its own unique set of opportunities and challenges.
The states are different in relative sizes, demographics, GDP levels, growth rates, factor endowments etc.
I am pleased to note that this study categorizes the states according to their level of development and desists from cross category comparisons.
The result of the exercise is before us.
I congratulate the award winners in different categories, particularly the Chief Ministers who are present in the audience.
It will also inspire others to learn and make the effort to join the ranks of the awardees.
It is noteworthy that despite elaborate and comprehensive categorization more than half the States of the Indian Union [16 out of 29 (Delhi included)] need to catch up with the States being felicitated here today.
I thank the organizers for having invited me and wish you all the very best.
I am happy to be here today for the inauguration of the biennial session of the National Union of Journalists (India) which is amongst the most prominent press organizations in the country.
I commend its work and salute all journalists who have worked tirelessly for the betterment of press in our country.
The press informs, educates even entertains.
In a democracy, it plays an important role in the formation, projection and dissemination of public opinion.
It is or should be a guardian of public interest, an honest witness to events, a tool to hold government accountable to the people.
It is also meant to be a bridge between the people and the government by facilitating dialogue for the formulation and implementation of state policies in accordance with the wishes of the people.
Freedom of press is thus one of the most important ingredients of democracy and reflects the character of the state.
The press played a role in the freedom struggle and Gandhi ji himself was perhaps the most influential editor/journalist of his times.
In independent India, press has acted as a cornerstone of democracy and accountability and most of the time has come up to public expectations.
Our media today has grown in size and coverage.
There are today around 93,985 registered publications, 850 permitted TV channels under news and current affairs category and 437 under non-news category.
Doordarshan itself runs 37 Channels.
Besides, there are over 250 FM radios stations and numerous internet websites.
We thus have every reason to be proud of the strength and diversity of Indian media.
However, and from time to time, there have been media-related developments that are disconcerting.
They raise questions about the media’s objectivity and credibility.
These relate to: In considering these questions, we now have the benefit of three weighty and relevant documents.
The first is a 2009 report by the Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI) at the instance of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting on ‘Cross Media Ownership in India’.
The second is a February 2013 Consultation Paper by the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) on media ownership question.
The third is a report on ‘Paid News’ made on May 6, 2013 by the Parliament’s Standing Committee on Information Technology.
Together, their findings present a disturbing picture.
The commercial imperatives for the incursion of big business into media and the resultant concentration and market domination are known to this audience.
These have worked against competition and media freedom.
The ASCI found that 11 of the top 23 TV networks had stakes in print and radio; the remaining had interests in at least two media platforms including television.
Four networks had vertical linkages in cable/DTH broadcasting.
In this scenario, the media is inclined or forced to adopt unethical methods.
The magnitude of the problem is highlighted in the TRAI paper.
The Standing Committee has recommended putting in place a suitable, concrete and enforceable mechanism to curb the problems of cross media ownership and paid news.
In both the options, media owners/interested parties should not be part of regulatory body.
Alongside, the Standing Committee has also stressed that the Government and the regulatory bodies concerned should improve the working conditions of media personnel, including contractual employment and wage scenario, and to ensure that the autonomy of the editorial staff was upheld.
It is thus evident that a detailed analysis of the nature of the problem, and its dimensions, is in the public domain and specifically with the government and parliament.
The need for comprehensive corrective action is imperative and must be undertaken without delay.
A failure to do so would lend credence to widely expressed apprehensions about “special interests”.
Friends, The issue of culture, ethics and malpractice in media is not specific to our country and have arisen in other democratic polities.
A recent case in point is the Leveson Inquiry Report in the United Kingdom in the aftermath of the ‘News of the World’ scandal.
Jai Hind
I commend the Bhagwan Mahaveer Foundation for this initiative to recognize individuals and institutions engaged in selfless public service.
This recognition is an expression of our gratitude for their exemplary work and serves as inspiration for others.
If we adopt this philosophy individually and collectively, we will become better human beings and make the world a better place.
The four areas in which the awards are being given are perhaps the most relevant factors in nation-building and for attainment of inclusive socio-economic development, especially in developing countries like ours.
We need to recall on this occasion Albert Schweitzer’s remark that “there is no higher religion than human service.
To work for the common good is the greatest creed.” Our four awardees embody this and emerge as shining examples of the compassion and courage of human spirit.
Similarly, social peace and security are essential for achieving the goal of inclusive growth.
Non-violence thus becomes a critical tool for creating a peaceful environment for development.
Here a question needs to be raised.
The Bhagwan Mahaveer Foundation’s work in its chosen fields has to be applauded.
I commend the distinguished jury for selecting such deserving personalities and institution for this year’s Mahaveer Awards.
I congratulate the four awardees for their achievements and this recognition which they so richly deserve.
This conference is timely.
Absence of literacy is denial of one of God Almighty’s gifts to mankind.
This audience knows well that the first Message given to the Prophet of Islam was in the opening verses of Surat al-Alaq.
And yet, despite these emphatic injunctions, many Muslims and many Muslim communities have for long ignored the need to acquire education and through it knowledge and, as a result, deprived themselves of the good that emanates from education.
Backwardness was a logical consequence.
There was a time in history when Muslim societies led the world in every form of knowledge.
Then neglect set in.
It has also generated demand for affirmative action by the State.
Educational backwardness thus has a negative impact on the social attainment of the community and by implication on its role in decision-making.
Education, therefore, is the most important socio-economic challenge for the Muslim community; its deficit is the biggest impediment to its progress, prosperity and empowerment.
Pursuant to the Sachar and Ranganath Mishra reports a number of schemes for scholarships and for development of minority- concentration districts were included in the 11th Plan.
The lessons learnt need to be translated into conceptual and procedural correctives.
The 12th Plan also recognises the importance of educational empowerment of the minorities, especially the Muslims, and aims at providing adequate resources and ensuring a more efficient and effective implementation of new and existing new schemes.
Here a question comes to mind.
This relates to the ambit of Article 15(4) of the Constitution.
This provision for affirmative action is inclusive, not exclusive, and can be extended to any class of citizens identified to be socially and educationally backward.
In doing so, we can draw upon our experience of six decades.
III The time is ripe for invigorating the process.
The high rate of admission at primary levels amongst the Muslims shows their intense desire to seek modern education.
The lower percentages at other levels show that the community starts lagging behind from the secondary level onwards.
The reason for this lies in economic incapacity.
Particular attention should be paid to vocational training centres and their employment potential.
The biggest catalyst for a positive transformation of society is the education of its women folk.
We will have to focus on female literacy, both in the national context and in the case of the Muslim community.
In rural areas, schools for girls up to senior secondary level should be made mandatory to ensure that girls continue their education.
This will also have a positive impact on employment and income generation for the families.
In many pursuits, educated and trained girls can work from home and generate income for the family.
As access to bank credit remains an issue for the minorities scholarships should target, in addition to primary levels, the secondary level band to ensure higher retention rates at that level.
Furthermore, tertiary level incentives, especially on scale of scholarships to those who qualify, should be appropriate and realistic.
Friends, The socio-economic amelioration of backward segments of the Muslim community is not merely a question of minority welfare.
It is my hope that over the next two days the Muslim Education Conference will provide a vibrant platform for discussions on the educational status of Muslims in India and come up with suggestions for consideration of the government as well as the civil society.
I bring to you good wishes from the people and Government of India on this very special occasion.
The establishment of the OAU this day 50 years ago was an event of global significance.
The African Union must take a large part of the credit for the emancipation of the African people from colonialism and apartheid.
Over the past five decades, Africa has stood tall inspired by the pan-African ideology of its founding fathers.
The African Union today is the modulated, considered voice of Africa, committed to the vision of peace, progress and prosperity for its peoples.
Our own leaders believed that India's freedom would remain incomplete as long as Africa remained in bondage.
Our development partnership with Africa has been illuminated by our own experience in nation building.
Reinvigorated and multi-dimensional in scope, this partnership is today being taken forward under the India-Africa Forum Summit process.
The Golden Jubilee celebration is an occasion to pay tribute to the vision of the founding fathers of the OAU.
I salute the leaders of Africa today, so many of whom are present here.
They will continue to lead the African Renaissance in the future.
In this endeavour, India will remain a trusted partner, working with Africa for the economic and social empowerment of its people.
Most people are surprised when told that the distance from Delhi to Tashkent is much less the distance to most parts of southern or north-eastern India.
This facilitated the movement of people and sharing of beneficial skills.
It is reflected to this day in linguistic affinities, social practices, customs culinary preferences and dress forms.
Today we came together to draw, on the basis of these solid foundations, the contours of a mutually beneficial relationship relevant to the imperatives of the 21st century.
This understanding at the highest political level gives us reason to be optimistic about the future of our relations.
Uzbekistan is one of India’s closest friends.
We celebrate your many successes since your independence.
It is important that we join hands to increase the intensity of our bilateral economic cooperation to match the already close level of political understanding and people-to-people affinity.
In recent times, our relations have been elevated to the level of a strategic partnership.
It means that we can look forward to cooperation in all possible spheres of human endeavour.
Today, India and Uzbekistan face common challenges from terrorism and religious extremism.
We therefore need to work closely towards promoting peace and stability not just in our common region, but in the entire world.
Ladies and Gentlemen, Our Parliaments have an important role to play in nation building and we need to learn from each other’s experiences.
We must encourage greater engagement between our two parliaments.
Details will be made available by the Secretary General.
I am happy to be here today for the inauguration of the International Centre for Environment Audit and Sustainable Development (ICED) set up by the Supreme Audit Institution of India, headed by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
I commend the choice of locating the Centre in Jaipur, capital of a state where conservation of environment and protection of biodiversity is a way of life.
This is a timely and laudable initiative.
The impact of indiscriminate human action and insatiable consumption on global environment has manifested itself in what is widely accepted as the phenomenon of climate change.
This has been coupled with rapid depletion or pollution of natural resources.
The high social, economic and political cost of environmental degradation and climate change is clear to all, even though the international community continues to debate on how to tackle climate change and who should foot the bill for ensuring sustainable development.
This does not take into account the environmental damage caused by production and consumption of goods and services.
This has to be factored in to arrive at a true measure of the increase in total production in the economy.
It is equally true that sustainability of economic development critically hinges on the protection of environment.
It is, therefore, imperative that we preserve and protect the environment while pursuing the essential goal of growth and development.
From this arises the need to pay greater attention to management of all natural resources.
These steps can contribute towards protecting environment and human health, supporting green technologies, and boosting green private investment and jobs.
In subsequent years, domestic policies have been tailored to take into account the environmental impact assessments.
Institutions to implement and monitor these policies have been set up at the centre and state level.
We have signed the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), and acceded to the Kyoto Protocol in 2002.
Thus while much has been done, the need for doing more is compelling.
Cognizant of the challenges that lie ahead, Government has spelt out the following vision for the future in the Twelfth Five Year Plan, which will be factored in all social and economic programmes and projects.
The CAG has a very important role to play in this regard - not only to comment on effectiveness of rules, regulations and programmes for conserving the environment but also has to offer concrete recommendations to the executive for improving environmental governance.
Some of environment reports of the CAG such as Management of Waste in India and Water Pollution in India have given new insight to the executive in improving environmental governance in these areas.
I am confident this good work will be continued.
The CAG is already an important member of the Steering Committee of the International Organization of Supreme Audit institutions, and of its Working Group on Environment Audit.
The creation of this Centre here, and its emphasis on research to upgrade knowledge and skills, will further strengthen India's role in this important body.
I congratulate the Comptroller and Auditor General for this timely initiative.
I wish ICED all success and hope it will become a global centre for audit of environment and sustainable development.
I compliment the CPWD for constructing this eco-friendly facility.
I thank you for having invited me today.
The book is a compilation of speeches delivered by late Shri Dinesh Goswami during his long and distinguished tenure as Member of Parliament, both in Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, during the period 1971-1990.
Shri Goswami was an eminent political leader from Assam who was a distinguished parliamentarian; a reputed legal luminary; a skilled orator and an ardent champion of public service.
In his illustrious political career, Shri Goswami served as Member of the Lok Sabha from 1971 to 1977; Member of the Rajya Sabha from 1978 to 1984.
He was once again elected to the Lok Sabha from 1985 to 1989.
He served as Union Minister of Law & Justice and Steel & Mines from December 1989 to November 1990, having been elected to the Rajya Sabha in 1990.
It is our collective loss that such a dynamic political leader was cruelly taken away from our midst in a car accident in 1991.
Given his legal background, Shri Goswami was at his best while speaking on matters of law and the constitution.
His speeches on regional issues, those related to socio-economic development of the Northeast, especially his home state of Assam, are also noteworthy.
He was a popular leader who was well liked not only by his own partymen but also by the opposition, which respected him for his integrity, courage of convictions and his unwavering commitment to democratic values and practices.
Shri Goswami was an integral part of our nation’s polity during two important decades of our recent history.
He lived through some of the major events of our Republic and saw the events unfold from a vantage point as Member of Parliament.
It is therefore appropriate and timely that his views and wisdom on various political, economic and social issues, expounded by him in his parliamentary speeches have been compiled in the form of this book.
Dealing with Terrorism in the Indian Ocean Rim Area I thank Ram Madhav ji, and the India Foundation, for inviting me today.
In recent years nothing has caused greater pain, disruption and inconvenience to societies, governments and individuals than the phenomenon of terrorism.
Its manifestation in any shape or form anywhere in the world is disruptive of normal life and therefore has to be condemned and countered.
One reason is the antiquity of the expression and its uses down the ages.
More names can be added to it today.
The stated motivation in each case related to addressing grievance of political nature, very often embedded in and seeking empowerment from ethnic, nationalist, or religious sources.
Modern weapons and easy access to lethal devices, has added to the efficacy of terror tactic; so has globalization, and information technology.
Modern terrorism is global in its dimensions.
It has emerged as one of the most dynamic regions of the world.
It has about 65% of the world oil reserves; its ports handle about 30% of global trade and half of the world's container traffic passes through this ocean.
This region is also culturally diverse with a variety of languages, religions, traditions and culture.
The countries of the Indian Ocean littoral and its immediate hinterland vary in terms of their geographies, populations, levels of economic development and political structures.
Security in the Indian Ocean region is capricious on account of a complex set of problems inherited from its recent past.
The fragility of institutions of new political systems in the region has often allowed political violence to prevail.
The objective of these groups remains the capture of state power and the transformation of the system of governance to one which conforms to their worldview.
Such terrorism is sustained by external agencies and states.
Conflicts beyond the Indian Ocean rim, including those in Afghanistan–Pakistan and Syria–Iraq in Asia, also overflow and impact the wider region.
These conditions could include poverty, demographic factors, social inequality and exclusion and dispossession.
For convenience of analysis, the background and situation of the region can be considered in five segments: South Asia, southern Arabian Peninsula, Horn of Africa, East Africa, and the ASEAN region.
Colonial rule and the neo-colonial policy of creating or aggravating religious, ethnic, or linguistic fissures lies at the root of many of present day conflicts and tensions.
External interventions motivated by geo-political considerations have exacerbated them.
Record shows its consistency.
In recent times, the rise of ISIS or Daesh in Syria-Iraq has caught the attention of the world.
This has led to anger and a desire to seek justice by any means, resulting in extremist action and terrorist violence.
In the aftermath of wars, the impacted communities are caught in a vicious circle of population pressures, resource stress, popular discontent and political instability making them susceptible to a pervasive extremist culture.
The availability of financial resources is critical to the success of these extremist groups.
Linked to it is the misuse of institutions intended to impart faith-based education.
Instances of it abound in Pakistan and Bangladesh and also in other countries of the Indian Ocean littoral.
These misinterpret religious texts to induce intolerance which, in turn, promotes a narrow and bigoted approach that is conducive to use of violence.
However, the most virulent factor fuelling terrorism is state sponsorship of and collusion with terrorists.
The association of criminal and terrorist organizations – as most terrorist groups are funded by the proceeds of different types of transnational crime and illegal money flows- makes them even more destructive.
The Piracy off the coast of Somalia, the illegal oil extraction in Iraq, the drug and human trafficking in South East Asia or poppy cultivation in Afghanistan- are all controlled and run by the operating terrorist networks to generate additional finances.
In many cases, the lucrative criminal activity becomes the sole reason for terrorist groups seeking political control by destabilizing existing regimes.
Such terror groups receive support from external actors who seek quick profits.
Globalization and integration processes make it apparent that trade, development, and security agendas are interrelated.
A fundamental change is needed in the way we approach these challenges.
The first challenge is to the national rule of law because terrorism is an abnormal activity to which societies can only adapt with difficulties.
The second challenge comes as international, or transnational, terrorism involves more than one country and multiple legal frameworks at the national and international level.
To provide a comprehensive answer to the threats posed by transnational crime and terrorism in the Indian Ocean Region, regional security and development agendas need to be connected and coordinated.
States sponsoring terrorism must be isolated by international community and forced to abandon the use of terrorism as a tool of state policy.
Jai Hind.
I have called this meeting in agony and distress.
The impact of this on public perceptions is being increasingly articulated in the media and on other public fora.
Expressions like “competitive hooliganism” and ‘collective shame’ have been used.
This reflects poorly on the dignity of the House and brings it down in public esteem.
Our rules are in force since July 1964.
Members have rights, but there are no rights outside the Rules.
These enjoin a Member, inter alia, to speak only from his or her allotted place in the chamber, to refrain from disorderly expressions and noises, and not to obstruct the proceedings in any manner.
There are specific provisions for action against Members who indulge in “grossly disorderly” conduct.
The Chair is also authorised to adjourn or suspend proceedings in the event of “grave disorder” arising in the House.
As the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, I deem it my duty to express concern about this trend, and to articulate a cautionary note about its possible consequences.
We have to correct our individual and collective behaviour.
We must bring to an end this dichotomy in our thinking and behaviour.
The Chair is entrusted with the responsibility of conducting the proceedings of the House and to preserve order.
I am very happy to be in Jalgaon and in the North Maharashtra University for its twenty first Convocation.
The NMU has, in a relatively short span of two decades, established itself as an important centre of education in this region.
I am happy to note that this University is located in a predominantly rural and backward area with about 25% tribal population.
It is imparting education to over one lakh seventeen thousand five hundred students through 218 affiliated colleges and institutes.
It has a special focus on students from marginalized sections of society, from the tribal and minority communities.
The proposed tribal Academy at Nandurbar is to be welcomed.
A university builds its reputation on good and innovative courses, quality teaching and research and a faculty that motivates.
Its students need to understand the problems of society in its immediate environment and help in resolving them through their knowledge and expertise.
The NMU, I understand, is doing so through its schemes of “Lab to Land” and “Lab to Industry.” Both are laudable.
The role of our youth would be critical in this endeavour.
Knowledge and skills would increasingly become the primary determinants of economic growth and social development.
According to the International Labour Organization,“Skill development is of key importance in stimulating a sustainable development process and can make a contribution in facilitating the transition from an informal to formal economy.
It aims at increasing the productivity and employability of workforce and to enhance its capability to adapt to changing technologies and labour market demands.
Allow me to amplify its implications.
India has the second largest working population in the world after China.
India is one of the few countries where the working age population will be far in excess of those dependent on them.
According to the World Bank, this will continue for at least three decades till 2040.
This would be a potential source of strength for our economy provided, and I repeat provided, we are able to equip and continuously upgrade the skills of our population in the working age group.
Alongside this window of opportunity for India, the global economy is expected to witness a skilled man power shortage to the extent of around 56 million by 2020.
Thus, our ‘demographic dividend’ can be utilised not only to expand the production possibility frontiers but also to meet the skilled manpower requirements in India and the rest of the world.
These skills have to be relevant to the emerging economic environment in order to achieve the twin targets of economic growth and inclusive development.
There is a disturbing side of the picture.
The quality of employment in organized sector is generally high though the scope of additional employment generation in this sector is rather limited.
On the other hand, the informal sector suffers from rampant under-employment, low productivity and even lower wages.
Given the overwhelming percentage of our people working in the informal sector, skill development and up-gradation becomes all the more important.
It is this skill gap that needs to be addressed through comprehensive efforts, at various levels and catering to different needs of the society and industry.
If our GDP grows at an average rate of about 8% till 2022, it is expected that we will need a skilled workforce of 500 million persons by 2022, with around 12 million people expected to join the workforce every year.
For an economy to sustain this growth rate, it would be essential for the workforce to be exposed to acquiring newer skills either through higher/technical education or vocation skills or a combination of both.
On the supply side the constraint is that while the school education sector is about 227 million in enrolment, the combined enrolment in higher education and vocational training is about 15.3 million.
This compares poorly with 90 million in China and 11 million in US.
For this to happen, the skill demand will have to be matched by adequate and quality supply through mainstreaming skill formation in the formal education system and at the same time introducing innovative approaches for the skill creation outside the formal education system.
Government is cognizant of this challenge.
To reap the benefits of “demographic dividend”, the Eleventh Five Year Plan favored the launching of a comprehensive National Skill Development Mission for coordinating and synergizing the efforts of the various central ministries that are involved in the skill development.
In addition, the National Skill Development Corporation has been established for catalysing private sector efforts in the skill development.
A National Policy on Skill Development was formulated in 2009 to focus on policy coherence, inclusivity and improving the quality with emphasis on employment outcomes.
The government has, therefore, put in place a governance structure for implementation of skill initiatives at highest level and the policy for providing an enabling environment and framework to address the challenges of skill development.
Government has initiated a number of programmes at centre and state level towards realization of this vision.
However, much more need to be done before we can declare success.
This will be a mammoth task since we will have about 63 per cent of our population in the working age group by 2022.
It translates into a very large number in absolute terms.
The 12th Five Year Plan target is to skill at least 50 million by 2017.
Governments, corporate sector, civil society and NGOs will have to combine their efforts in a mission mode towards the attainment of this goal by 2022.
In this context, the education sector in the country has a special responsibility.
Allow me to quote it: “The vocational education sector is at present outside the purview of universities and colleges.
Alienation of this sector can be overcome by bringing it under the purview of universities and by providing necessary accreditation to the courses available in polytechnics, industrial training institutions, and so on.
The need for quality is imperative.
Learn new skills and upgrade the existing ones.
Whenever you take an action or decision keep public good in mind and decide on what is best for the country.
If you follow this axiom, you will improve yourself and at the same time you will also make this world a much better place for all to live in.
We share their happiness and rejoice in their success.
I wish them all the best in their careers and happiness in their lives.
I am confident that they will take their ideals and dreams forward and work for the good of society and the country.
The role of the legendary Utkal Gourav Madhusudan Das and the Utkal Sammelani in bringing into existence the state of Odisha is well known.
Credit for this goes to Madhu Babu’s daughter Shailabala Das, who was an educationist, social reformer, and a pioneer in the field of women’s emancipation and liberation.
Today this College, having 2584 students and a faculty of 92,  offers education to women from plus 2 level to degree and post graduate courses.
It has been rated as “A” grade by NAAC.
A strong and active alumni association is a great support for the college.
Shailabala Das was a champion of women’s cause and a believer in their upliftment through education.
She rightly believed that women’s education is a prerequisite for their emancipation and empowerment in a world that is often characterized by patriarchal values and oppressive social structures.
The status and condition of women in India during her life time was factored on rigid social structures and a regressive mindset.
Her initiative of setting up this College is therefore all the more commendable.
Friends, this is an appropriate occasion to share some thoughts on two matters of high priority on the national agenda.
The first relates to the status of women in our society and the second to the empowerment of women to enable them to play their role as equal citizens.
The two need to be considered together, sequentially, so that assessments and correctives are based on ground realities.
Our country has been blessed with remarkable women leaders who have left an indelible mark on our society and polity through their invaluable contributions.
In most parts of our vast land, there is an acutely unhappy coexistence of mutually incompatible social norms.
Much too often we disregard their basic human rights and the rights guaranteed to them by the Constitution of India.
Much too often attitudes towards women at home and in the family are not reflective of gender parity.
Let us consider some disturbing facts relating to the overall national picture.
There has been an increase in literacy amongst women from 53.67 per cent (2001) to 65.46 per cent (Census 2011).
Data shows women occupy only 10.7% of the seats in Parliament; less than 10% seats in High Courts and Supreme Courts and only 2-3% senior administrators and managers are women.
Violence against women is a major challenge.
Data from National Crime Records Bureau indicates that the total number of crimes against women increased by 29.6 per cent between 2006 and 2010.
The 2005–06 National Family Health Survey also reported that one-third of women aged 15 to 49 had experienced physical violence, and approximately one in 10 had been a victim of sexual violence.
The first corrective has to be in the mind.
Gender injustice is a social impairment and therefore has to be corrected in social attitudes and behaviour.
The corrective in laws and procedures is one aspect of it; it is work in progress.
In February 2012 the Government set up a High Level Committee on Status of Women headed by Justice Ruma Pal.
Its report is expected next year.
In this context, the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women and gender parity is essential for progress, as gender discrimination imposes a heavy cost on the entire society.
Empowering women fuels thriving economies, spurring productivity and growth.
This is equally, if not more, applicable for India as well.
In 2012, the World Bank found that eliminating all forms of discrimination against women in employment could increase productivity per worker by up to 40 percent.
Gender equality was recognized as integral to all three aspects.
At the same time there exists a contradictory scenario where women are also victims of deep-rooted mindset of gender bias and discrimination.
This manifests itself in confining them to domestic chores, restricting their mobility poor access to health services, nutrition, education and employment, and exclusion most of the time from the public and political sphere.
Other parameters such as work participation rates, child sex ratio and gender based violence also remain at less than desirable levels for women.
Education thus emerges as a critical factor.
While the overall picture in the country is one of progress in many aspects, large gaps still remain with respect to status of women in India.
To underscore the point, let me give you some disturbing facts.
According to the 2011 census, women account for 586.47 million in absolute numbers and represent 48.46 per cent of the total population of the country.
If our overarching national objective is to become a progressive, prosperous and modern country through rapid, sustained and inclusive economic growth, attainment of gender parity through elimination of discrimination against women is a necessary condition.
No society can hope to achieve its developmental goals without addressing the critical issues affecting half its population.
Status quo, therefore, is not an option.
Under the Constitution, women have been guaranteed equal rights as citizens of the country.
Laws have been enacted to preserve, protect and promote women’s rights and empower them through their participation in public and private space on equal terms.
Reservation for women in the Panchayati Raj Institutions has been a landmark step.
Much more, however, needs to be done.
Laws that are on the statute book require to be implemented stringently, and law-enforcers instructed regularly about the need for it in terms of social objectives.
The students of this institution, as women leaders of tomorrow, have a special responsibility in this matter.
I am confident that they would discharge it fully.
I thank the organisers for having invited me for this function and giving me an opportunity to speak to the students.
I congratulate the students, faculty and the well wishers of this institution on its centenary and wish the College greater glory in the years ahead.
I am happy to be back in the salubrious surroundings of the Jawaharlal Nehru University and feel privileged to be invited to deliver the first G. Parthasarathi Memorial Lecture.
Gopalaswami Parthasarathi was the first Vice Chancellor of this institution.
“GP”, as he was popularly known, has been described as ‘one of the most influential figures in our national life and a fine product of the Nehru era.
He did useful work as Chairman of the International Commission for Supervision and Control in Indo-China, as Ambassador to Indonesia, China, Pakistan, and as our Permanent Representative to UN in New York.
He crossed with ease the fine line between diplomacy and statecraft; in the process, he contributed to both.
He was an adroit practitioner of the art of negotiations and brought to it the required temperament.
Hence the continuing need for diplomacy in a changed, and changing, world.
This skill and experience was present in the persona of GP.
The diplomat in him would have relished responding creatively to the new challenges.
Instead of developing a shared moral consensus, the effort has been prescriptive premised on political, economic and military power.
The propensity to explore and realise new forms of dominance seems to continue unabated.
The lessons learnt in recent past, as the editorials in the Financial Times of March 4, 2013 and the New York Times of March 19 tend to show, are inadequately imbibed.
The process is already underway.
Responses would thus need to be innovative, timely and appropriate.
One other factor is relevant.
It remains work in progress.
The concept itself however is a slippery one, used to describe as well as prescribe policy.
A similar study in terms of Indian impulses may yield interesting results.
The primary duty of the State in any society is to provide security, to protect it from external aggression and internal disturbance and to create conditions for the promotion of welfare and prosperity of its citizens.
This audience knows well that concepts can be double-edged swords.
They can and have opened the door for a modified, modulated, definition of state sovereignty and national interest.
It can take different forms.
The value of a diplomat, therefore, lies in his ability to communicate, negotiate and persuade.
Negotiations must be conducted without illusions.
Revolutionary change through negotiation is therefore a rarity.
Beyond the methodology of negotiations lies the question of content.
None of this, it would seem, is likely to contradict the basic premise and approach enunciated in different formulations in the past six decades nor would it modify or change the content and objective of policy.
A contributing factor for deviations is the pressure emanating from states.
Some of these impinge on or constrict the Centre’s ability to conduct foreign relations.
In the case of India, the margin is provided by outsiders’ perception of the country’s strengths and weaknesses.
Morality is defined as conformity to principles concerning goodness or badness of human conduct.
Diplomacy is traditionally credited with an amoral tradition.
Yet, its practitioners have at all times claimed to espouse moral values.
Human beings live in organized communities called states, and the totality of states constitute the international community.
The community of nations, on the other hand, has been characterized as an anarchical society with a complex set of relations amongst its members.
The process is slow and time consuming; progress, nevertheless, has been made.
These include the conventions on elimination of all forms of racial discrimination, discrimination against women, conventions against torture, corruption, transnational organized crime, corruption, illicit traffic in narcotic and psychotropic substances, chemical weapons etc.
They can be, and have been, invoked to bring pressure to bear on states who deviate from these norms.
To that extent, it can be said that the ambit of common interests has continued to expand and, along with it, the propensity to confirm to a new set of norms.
Diplomacy has been the handmaiden of this endeavour.
Patiently but persistently, it has helped shape perceptions, bridge gaps, innovate solutions.
There is, however, another side of the picture.
The international community too is a product of time and carries the scars of history.
The quantum of legitimacy it bestows on itself, and on its decision-making processes, remains a matter of debate.
Record would show that often the imperative is mendacious rather than moral.
There could be a third perspective, that of the visionary.
In 1994 in a seminal lecture entitled Human Wrongs and International Relations the political scientist Ken Booth urged the need to ‘recognise the limits of state-centric perspectives’ under conditions of globalization.
He would set up an inter-disciplinary Centre at JNU to study its implications for India, Asia and the world!
I thank Professor Sopory and the JNU for inviting me.
Jai Hind.
Friends, Our country has been blessed with remarkable women leaders who have left an indelible mark on our society and polity through their invaluable contributions.
Much too often we fail to treat women as equal citizens; much too often we disregard their basic human rights.
Pratibha Devisingh Patil ji is exemplary and a source of inspiration for our fellow citizens.
She also served with distinction as a Cabinet Minister in the state government holding various important portfolios; Leader of Opposition in the Maharashtra legislative Assembly; Member of Parliament; Deputy Chairman Rajya Sabha and Governor Rajasthan.
Her contributions in the field of agriculture and rural development; education; women’s empowerment and others social issues are noteworthy.
As President of India, she upheld the constitutional norms diligently and with the gravitas befitting the high office.
She took important initiatives and continued working towards the socio-economic development of the country in her usual understated but determined way.
I commend Professor Sunaina Singh for her initiative on writing this book which gives us a full picture of the life and achievements of the first woman President of India.
It is not just a biography which only narrates the events in the life of a person.
This Annual Conference, organized by the National Commission for Minorities, has now become a useful platform for exchange of views between the National Commission, the State Minorities Commissions and other stake-holders from all over the country.
It gives the participants an opportunity to deliberate on the modalities of redressing grievances and of corrective action by central and state government agencies.
This Conference is timely and so is its theme.
There is an enhanced awareness both of the problems of minorities and of the imperative need to address them through affirmative action by the state.
Alongside, regrettably, communal tensions appear to have re-emerged in different parts of the country.
The conclusion is inescapable that our communal fabric is under pressure.
According to the 2001 census, recognised religious minorities comprise 18.4% of our population, which translates into approximately 185 million people.
This number today could be around 220 million.
If we include others who are claiming inclusion in this category, it could be said in general terms that every fifth Indian citizen belongs to a religious minority.
Their progress and well being is a prerequisite for us to realise our destiny of becoming a modern, prosperous and developed state.
Given the theme of this conference, allow me to raise a few conceptual questions that come to mind: I confess the questions leave me confounded.
A better approach would be to look at patterns of nature where the operative theme is diversity.
Thus viewed, social diversity emerges in a different perspective; it also reshapes the question.
It then became evident that homogeneity is essentially a limiting concept, that diversity in society as in nature is a reality, and that the central challenge is not diversity but the management of diversity.
This diversity is recognised in the world of the twenty first century.
Its quantum varies from society to society, state to state, system to system.
In our own country, it has been accepted down the ages as a fact of life and is reflected in the plural nature of our society.
Independent India’s Constitution endowed it with a secular polity and a democratic state structure.
It is the Constitution that gives rights to all citizens and specific rights to minorities.
The question of sensitivity and responsibility therefore is equally applicable to all citizens, is to be judged in terms of the provisions of the Constitution only, and cannot be assigned or sought selectively.
The Constitution is premised on the ideals of justice, liberty, equality and fraternity and promises them to all citizens.
The basic principle is equality before the law and equal protection of the laws.
Away from generalisations in formal and legal terms, an assessment of the ground reality pertaining to minorities needs to cover four areas: (a) identity (b) security (c) share in the fruits of development and (d) role in decision-making.
Given the complexity of our societal landscape and its variables, the articulation of grievances by different religious minorities has varied in content and intensity.
While some are sporadic, others seem to be endemic.
The identity question has been settled through the enforcement of fundamental rights inscribed in the Constitution.
Attempts however are made from time to time to circumscribe the ambit of Article 25 relating to freedom of religion, including the right to propagate.
The security question remains at the core of the political discourse of the minorities and sections of civil society.
The requirement of social peace and fraternity demands greater commitment and more persistent performance by governments at central and state levels.
The equity question is a perennial one.
The operative principles are equality of status and opportunity and social, economic and political justice.
We know that equality before the law, equality of opportunity in matters of public employment and prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste sex or place of birth are fundamental rights but despite these safeguards, many amongst the minorities have not benefited equally or in adequate measure.
Their implementation was uneven; the scholarships benefited a good number but reports about the identified districts are less emphatic.
Access to credit remains a recurring grievance.
Civil society groups have drawn attention to the need for awareness and community engagement at the local level.
As one report put it, ‘there is complete disconnect between minority welfare infrastructure and Muslim civil society, and poor effort by government to create awareness of schemes and reach out to beneficiary groups/Muslim civil society.
Absence of development oriented leadership and poor Muslim representation in decision making bodies – at state, district and local levels makes the situation worse.
The role in the matter of the state and local administrations remains critical.
The 12th Plan schemes, more focused and benefiting from the experience gained, should reach the target areas in greater depth and intensity.
The question of Role in Decision-making, as citizens and as affected citizens, is to be viewed in the context of the functioning of a democratic polity.
It throws up elected representatives at local, regional and national levels.
Democratic theory assumes that these representatives reflect the wishes and requirements of their constituents.
Some studies, including the Report of the Expert Group on Diversity Index, tend to lend credence to this point of view.
And so we come back to the question of sensitivity and responsibility.
Both are critical to the discharge of civic responsibilities; both must be inclusive rather than exclusive; both must bear in mind that national progress would be retarded and slanted if every fifth citizen is left out of it.
We are, after all, the world’s largest model of how diversity is accommodated in a functioning democracy.
I thank Wajahat Habibullah saheb and the Members of the National Commission for Minorities for inviting me.
I wish the Conference all success.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be here today for the release of the book ‘Ambedkar Speaks: 301 Seminal Speeches’ by Dr. Narendra Jadhav, a Member of the Planning Commission, a distinguished educationist, economist, administrator, social scientist and a prolific writer.
It is therefore befitting that a distinguished personality of our time has produced an authoritative work on one of the architects of modern India, whose services to the nation, especially during the formative years of our Republic, are exemplary.
Baba Saheb Dr. Bhim Rao Ambedkar was an astute political leader, prominent constitutionalist, jurist, economist, thinker and a transformational social reformer.
He played a seminal role in the drafting our Constitution.
The life and work of Dr. Ambedkar is a testament of his tireless fight against the abhorrent practice of untouchability and the unjust caste system on behalf of the oppressed and the poor.
His emphasis on dignity, unity, freedom and rights for all citizens, and particularly the less fortunate segments of our people is adequately reflected in the Constitution.
Dr. Ambedkar’s philosophy and message has an abiding relevance.
His views on democracy; social and economic justice; gender equality, national unity and religious belief provide important inputs in our quest for finding solutions to some of the demanding questions of our times.
His approach is reflected in the following passage:  “What we must do is not to content ourselves with mere political democracy.
We must make our political democracy a social democracy as well.
Political democracy cannot last unless there is at the base of it, a social democracy.
These principles of liberty, equality and fraternity are not to be treated as separate items.
They form a union in the sense that, to divorce one from the other is to defeat the very purpose of democracy.” Dr. Narendra Jadhav’s effort in the volumes before us is commendable.
I congratulate Dr. Jadhav on this excellent work.
It is befitting that the CSE has instituted the series of Anil Agrawal Dialogue, which is not only a tribute to the outstanding environmentalist but also a useful platform to take forward his valuable legacy.
Besides being the founder-director of the Centre for Science and Environment, which is India’s most prominent and influential environmental NGO, Anil Agrawal was amongst the pioneers of serious environmental studies in India.
Towards this goal, he dedicated his life in advocating people-centric policies in natural resource management, which are based on our indigenous traditions in environmental management.
Anil was also a prolific writer whose contribution in raising public awareness in the country on critical issues of environment management, climate change and pollution control remains unparalleled.
This edition of the Anil Agrawal Dialogue is aimed at furthering the agenda of the CSE’s seventh ‘State of India’s Environment Report’ titled ‘Excreta Matters’.
This two-volume report provides details about the water and sewage situation in urban India, with facts and figures from 71 cities across the country.
The report has been released in several cities across the country and has highlighted the importance of better management of urban water and waste.
Cities have used up or have polluted their water resources.
India’s burgeoning cities have started sourcing water from far, outlying areas, to quench their thirst for water.
Besides the shortfall of water supply, stark inequity in access to water in our cities is also a reality.
Friends, waste and water are two sides of a coin.
Indian cities produce nearly 40,000 million litres of sewage per day, enough to irrigate 9 million hectares.
However, barely 20 per cent of this is treated, which is an enormous waste of a critical resource.
Our cities have still not understood that wherever there is water, there will be waste.
This waste needs to be collected, treated and then disposed.
However, sewage and sewerage still remain one of the most neglected and flawed part of urban planning in India.
The CSE’s ‘Excreta Matters’ clearly brings out the lack of foresight in urban sewage and waste water management.
This kills the receptacle besides polluting the groundwater.
The CSE’s report has found that in all states, nitrate levels in groundwater exceed the permissible levels, a clear indicator that it is non-potable.
This is a direct consequence of sewage contamination.
The pollution load coupled with overexploitation has killed many rivers.
Simultaneously, urban lakes and wetlands have steadily disappeared under ‘development’ or have become cesspools.
These water bodies are crucial to the survival of our cities, as they maintain the groundwater balance, absorb and store water from rainfall and moderate the climate.
‘Excreta Matters’ makes a strong case for wise water and sewage management.
It advocates augmenting, protecting and renovating local water resources to reduce the cost of water supply and improve equity.
Rainwater harvesting has to be maximized.
These are welcome suggestions.
We have developed a rich diversity of water management suited to local climates.
Modern technology can help make these more efficient.
We have to identity and maximize local water resources and ensure its sustainability though prudent conservation and recharge, as sourcing water from great distance is wasteful and unsustainable.
We also have to change our approach to handling waste water, which is a valuable resource.
This can happen when we start to use a menu of sewage treatment options that go beyond the current limited list of conventional sewage treatment.
There are proven technologies for sewage treatment using natural processes that have been developed and used in India.
The treated water can be a valuable resource for agriculture or horticulture and replace groundwater use to some extent.
We must work towards conserving water to minimize the generation of waste water.
We must make people understand how water and waste are inter-connected.
Only with a judicious combination of water supply and waste water management can we hope to confront the water crisis that is looming large before us!
I commend the Centre for Science and Environment for this timely and important initiative.
I understand that the Anil Agrawal Dialogue brings together some of the finest minds in the field of water and sewage management.
I congratulate him on this deserving honour.
The budget is not merely a statement of financial receipts and expenditure of the government.
It is a significant political statement of government policy and its priorities for the economy.
The budget reflects the either the country's or the state's or the panchayat's economy and shapes the direction in which the government of the day wants to take it as per its policies and priorities.
It is also a government's plan for raising revenues through taxation, borrowing and incurring expenditure under the relevant heads.
The government channelizes its financial resources thus raised in the various sectors of the economy and government.
The Constitution of India does not use the term 'budget' but only refers to Annual Financial Statements.
As per Articles 112 and 202 the Union Government and State governments are constitutionally mandated to prepare and present 'budgets', which are financial statements of receipts and expenditure, both current and capital.
The importance of research and analysis in the technical and political aspects of budget making can be gauged from the fact that besides the Union and state governments, there are around 2.4 lakhs local self government bodies, including panchayats and municipalities, which are in dire need of better budgetary management for financial viability and sustainability.
They would be important beneficiaries of advanced research and training in this area.
Especially, at a time, when there aren't many institutions in the country dedicated to the study and research related to budget making and management.
In due course, the Centre would also endeavour to start a post-graduate course in budget and budget management.
I congratulate Cochin University of Science and Technology and the Government of Kerala for this excellent initiative and wish the Centre and all those related with it all the best for a bright, fruitful and enlightening future.
Friends, we are gathered here to commemorate the 140th birth anniversary of Vakkom Mohammed Abdul Khader, popularly known as Vakkom Moulavi, one of the doyens of the Kerala's renaissance.
This struggle for basic political, economic and social rights was a hallmark of Kerala's revival and amongst the main reasons for its subsequent social and economic development in modern India.
Unlike most members of the Muslim community in Travancore of the time, who were engaged largely in trade or agriculture, Vakkom Moulavi emerged as a great scholar and linguist through his own efforts.
He read the writings of leading authors from the West and corresponded with the leaders of the Islamic renaissance in Egypt.
More importantly, he believed that knowledge was not meant to remain in the realm of theory, but was a stimulus for action.
The Vakkom Moulavi Foundation Trust was set up with a mission to contribute to building the character of the people, through knowledge and action, promote social harmony and address the problems of the under privileged.
Each of these pursuits is relevant to the contemporary Indian society.
It is said that introspection is an incentive for action.
Sixty three years later, we need to assess the extent to which this has been realized.
Regular free and fair elections are held wherein people exercise their free will to choose their governments.
The efficiency of the Indian electoral process, with its scale and complexity, is globally looked at with awe.
The Indian political system includes mechanisms aimed at accommodating diversity and redressing historical injustices, including by recognising and promoting the rights of various groups in our society.
We have even joined the aid givers club.
We are now in the process of emerging as knowledge-based economy.
Despite the global economic and financial crisis and the resultant slowdown in growth, India still remains amongst the fast growing economies.
Thanks to the green revolution and subsequent agricultural research and development, food shortages and famines are only a dark memory from the past.
Our trained human resources in areas of science and technology, including doctors and engineers, are a great asset.
In frontline areas of research, such as space, nuclear, bio-technology, nano-technology and Information Technology, our progress is commendable.
In terms of socio-economic parameters, indicators of poverty, unemployment, inequality, illiteracy, health, malnutrition, shelter etc.
Affirmative action or positive discrimination has improved the lot of the traditionally deprived and marginalized sections of society, including scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and the minorities.
Equality before law and equality of opportunity have been guaranteed as per the Constitution.
Discrimination on the basis of gender, caste, religion, creed or language has been made illegal and punishable under law.
These steps have established the prerequisites of making our democracy and society more egalitarian: politically, economically and socially, as had been visualized by the founding fathers of our nation.
Despite these achievements, our nation-building agenda is yet to be completed and formidable challenges still confront us.
We confront violence emanating from forces who challenge the writ of the constitutional framework of the State.
There are others who exploit the fault lines in our society based on narrow identities derived from caste, religion, ethnicity, language and regionalism.
Declining standards of probity in public life threaten the very foundations of our Republic.
Poverty, inequality and unemployment remain the major obstacles to our development aspirations.
In spite of the gains of the last six decades, 29.8% of the population or 354.60 million people were estimated to be living below the poverty line in 2009-2010.
On the other hand, the top 10% of the income groups earned 33% of the income.
The national figures on illiteracy, disease, malnutrition, infant mortality, declining child sex ratio, homelessness and many other socio-economic indicators are less than comforting.
According to the 2011 Population Census, 26% of our population is still illiterate bestowing India with the dubious distinction of having the maximum number of illiterate in the world.
The quality of our school and university education is mostly below global standards.
In UNDP's Human Development Report for 2011, India ranks 134 out of a total of 187 countries.
Similarly the shortage of skilled manpower will remain a constraint on our high growth aspirations if the quality and quantity of general and technical educational is not enhanced through greater investment and quality control.
A pre-requisite for all this is improvement in the quality of governance and delivery.
For this purpose, reforms in the vital areas such as judiciary, police, electoral system, anti-corruption laws, environmental laws, education system etc are imperative.
Foremost amongst these would be the task of improving the functioning of our democracy through eradication of corruption, de-criminalisation of politics and reform of the electoral system.
The task is momentous given the size of our population and the complexity of issues.
It cannot also be left to the government alone.
The examples set by Vakkom Moulavi, Shi Rajagopal and the Vakkom Moulavi Foundation Trust shows us the way.
The model can be replicated.
The message for all of us is that despondency is not an option, nor is resignation a way out.
Citizenship bestows rights and imposes duties.
We have to follow Gandhiji's advise "Be the change you want to see in the world" as the mantra for civic action.
A philanthropist had once said that "every right implies a responsibility; every opportunity an obligation; every possession a duty".
We are gathered here today to mark the 20th anniversary of the Association and I am happy to be participating in the first IORA Leaders’ Summit.
I thank our host for the warm hospitality extended to me and my delegation.
I congratulate the Chair, Indonesia, for providing visionary leadership to the Association.
The Indian Ocean is at the crossroads of global trade.
This creates limitless opportunities for growth and prosperity.
Ours is a region marked by great diversity of cultures and levels of economic development.
As IORA member States, we recognize that the sea does not separate; rather it is a bridge that connects.
We have made a beginning by unveiling Project Mausam to re-kindle our cultural linkages.
We look forward to more creative engagements, both bilateral and collective, among the member States.
The IORA Concord we sign today is a milestone document that underscores the criticality of maritime safety and security.
India shares the vision for a peaceful region and the seas around us.
We believe that our ocean must be protected from traditional and non-traditional threats, particularly piracy.
All using these international waters must act with responsibility and restraint.
We have an imperative need for open trade and open sea lanes that carry it.
I call upon the IORA member states to ensure that the freedom of navigation and over-flight in the Indian Ocean is respected by all, as an expression of our commitment to UNCLOS.
My Government would be happy to host such a centre in India, with our in-house expertise supplemented by support from IORA member countries.
We will also be happy to share our hydrographical capability with the member states for better navigation and understanding of marine topography.
Today, terrorism has become the major impediment to development and threatens all pluralist and open societies.
No cause justifies the indiscriminate killing of innocent civilians.
The perpetrators, organizers, financiers and sponsors of terrorism must be isolated and face strong sanctions.
We have reiterated our commitment to combating terrorism by adopting the IORA Declaration on countering violent extremism.
I would like to propose a network of think tanks to enable the collation of available resources with member countries.
This would help synergize the efforts of individual members States.
In this context, I am happy to announce the intention of my government to establish “IORA Centre of Excellence (ICE)” in one of the coastal cities of India.
The objective would be to provide academics and researchers access to a collective source of data and resource material.
We will shortly be circulating a concept note on the proposed Centre through the IORA Secretariat.
The Action plan adopted today is a vision of our shared priorities.
India stands committed to working with other members to realize the region’s untapped potential and to ensure that the Indian Ocean becomes a zone of prosperity and harmony.
Thank You.
I am delighted to be here today, and thank the University for inviting me.
This University, established in 1949, has emerged as a major centre of learning with 52 post graduate departments, 300 affiliated colleges spread over 4 districts and 5 constituent colleges in its jurisdiction.
The University Grants Commission has designated it as 'University with Potential for Excellence'.
This is a commendable achievement.
I convey my heartiest felicitations to the students who are graduating today.
As they step out of this temple of learning into the wide world full of opportunities and challenges, I wish them the very best in their future endeavours.
Convocations are occasions to honour intellectual achievement.
The mind trained to think logically and critically does not cease to function.
The centrality of social purpose thus stands underlined.
In this context, we need to consider the challenges confronting us in the field of higher education.
These relate to (1) access (2) equity and (3) quality.
The target of increasing the Gross Enrolment Ratio from current low levels to 30% by 2020 would itself translate into 24 million new enrolments.
There is a shortage of well-trained faculty; also of faculty sufficiently committed to its calling.
In many institutions, infrastructure is poor and curricula outdated and irrelevant.
The use of technology in higher education remains limited and standards of research and teaching at Indian universities are far below international standards.
The Deloitte Report also refers to the data emanating from the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC).
The education system on the whole is not aligned to the skill and manpower needs of the market.
Therefore, skills shortage across sectors is accompanied by high levels of graduate unemployment.
Contributions by cutting edge technology in industry and high value-added services to the national GDP is increasing.
As both are knowledge and skill intensive, their accretion requires a high quality infrastructure of higher education.
The emergence of India as a service-based, knowledge driven economy has added fresh impetus to the necessity of enhancing and upgrading our human capital.
This is clearly stated in the 12th Five Year Plan.
Allow me to quote the relevant lines:  "Higher education is critical for developing a modern economy, a just society and a vibrant polity.
It equips young people with skills relevant for the labour market and the opportunity for social mobility.
Similarly, the skills creation that we have embarked upon has to conform to global standards and the contemporary requirements of our economy.
We have the advantage of a young population.
For this to be availed of, quality and performance is an essential pre-requisite.
Otherwise, the dividend could become a burden with unpleasant consequences for society.
I conclude by sharing the joy and satisfaction of all the recipients of various degrees and honours.
I am confident that they will take their ideals and dreams forward and use the knowledge and skills learnt at the University for the good of society and the country.
Over two thousand years ago, Gautam Buddha taught, , "if you light a lamp for someone else it will also brighten your path".
A word about nomenclature is relevant.
Despite this, the propensity of the West Asians to call the region Middle East is, to say the least, baffling.
Is it a case of "reinforcement of the stereotype" or, to use Antonio Gramci's phrase, "a dilution of the consciousness of what one really is"?
II Allow me to begin with a preposition that might sound startling.
The so-called "Arab Spring" did not happen suddenly.
What is the nature of the turmoil and the forces propelling it?
The experience of each, however, was distinct.
The implications of the latter were far reaching.
This could not but impact on the nationalist upsurge that surfaced in different places from time to time.
The clash of secular and Islamist nationalist traditions also became pervasive.
Other developments, relating to the advent of authoritarian governance combining one party and military rule, aggravated the process.
It suited the regimes and also the patterns of Western dominance and strategies of the Cold War.
The one exception was Palestine.
It wounded the psyche of every individual in every Arab land.
In 2002 the Arab Human Development Report identified freedom, empowerment of women, and knowledge as the three deficits that hampered human development in Arab countries.
As an instrument of protest, it sought democratic governance to deny the legitimacy of the authoritarian state.
Saddam Hussain's misadventure in Kuwait left him crippled but without loosening his hold on Iraq.
An external catalyst was injected on spurious ground in the shape of the Iraq War.
The wars in Iraq and Afghanistan also demonstrated the limits of the military capacity of the United States in a non-conventional conflict.
In August 2010, through Presidential Study Directive 11, President Obama asked his government agencies to prepare for change.
The new situation in both countries has prompted apprehensions about efforts to give shape to various projects of cartographic engineering in the region, or as Hassanein Haikal put it recently, "a New Sykes-Picot."
The loss of political power by the Arab Sunnis of the country was deeply resented and continues to be contested.
It also has wider geo-political ramifications.
In 2004 the King of Jordan contributed, allegedly at the prompting of his chief of intelligence, the term "Shia Crescent" to the political vocabulary of the region.
Unconsciously, perhaps, it helped highlight the geopolitical gains that accrued to Iran in the wake of the Iraq War.
The immediate details of the political eruptions in the past two years in Tunisia and Egypt are known to most people; the backdrop is not.
Since independence in 1956, the Tunisian public or people (sha'b) mostly subscribed to the ideal to a homogenous, united, modern, Francophile and secular body-politic and a paternalistic relationship in a 'pact of obedience' to the Leader (Zaim).
Economic grievances did surface from time to time but did not transform themselves into movements for rights.
And yet, as the happening of February 6 was to show, derailment is always on the cards.
Egypt is the very reverse of the relative tranquillity of Tunisia though the Tunisian protests served as an inspiration.
The leaderless protestors in Tahrir Square and elsewhere in Egypt, fully assisted by modern communications technology and ad hoc mechanisms of defence against police tactics, focussed on toppling the Mubarak regime.
The first stage of the Egyptian revolution was essentially leaderless and reflected the aspirations of all segments of society.
Its limitations became evident with the progress of events.
Violence, until recently, was generally avoided.
Ominous signs of a reversal are now emerging.
In a first reaction, the Ministry of Interior has called them terrorists and ordered their arrest.
A challenge is being mounted by the liberal-secularists, but not the salafists, to the legitimacy of the President himself.
The Brotherhood's uncompromising position on the making of the constitution and the electoral law has hardened the political divide which can only be addressed by the proposed National Dialogue.
Events in Libya, beginning in February 2011, took a somewhat different course.
Nor were miscalculations avoided; the murder of the US Ambassador in Benghazi was to show that the nature of some of Gaddafi's opponents was not fully understood.
III Two dimensions of the developments discussed above require closer scrutiny.
The first relates economic grievances.
High unemployment among the youth, and declining household incomes, has been a common factor of social unrest in all the affected countries.
A World Bank report in September 2012 assessed that "recent political changes will be meaningful if they lead to concrete social and economic development.'
The Bank has emphasised the need for transparency, good governance, job creation and competitive private sector.
A satisfying factor, from the view point of the donors, is the acceptance by the new regimes of the neo-liberal economic reforms undertaken by the previous administrations.
Less explicit, but nevertheless constraining, are the requirements of rich regional donors.
There is no evidence as yet of these matters having been addressed comprehensively by the new administrations; tactical commitments, however, have been made.
Unease about the activities of the Muslim Brotherhood in GCC states, particularly UAE's concern about Al-Islah, has acquired a higher profile in recent months.
The sole exception to this is Qatar which maintains a multi-pronged relationship with the Brotherhood.
A critical question discussed in different fora and on different planes, directly as well as elliptically, is the place of Islam in society and in State policies.
Some in this audience would know that in terms of the political theory of Islam, governance is to be by consultation, allegiance is conditional, and dissent admissible.
This, in modern terminology, would tantamount to democratic governance.
The political history of Muslim societies, however, is characterised by the opposite.
The challenge for contemporary Muslim societies, in the wake of the upsurge against autocratic governance, is to seek legitimacy both in the light of their own cultural authenticity and the norms of the contemporary world.
Local situations, even national characteristics, would shape the contours of the debate and outcomes in individual societies.
Generalised perceptions of approval or otherwise would be unhelpful.
One last aspect pertains to external impulses.
Since the advent of the 21st century, the region and its countries have been witness to initiatives based on innovative doctrines emanating from Western powers.
Bahrain would be an exception to this.
If and when turbulence does reach the GCC, it would impact on our strategic and commercial interests significantly.
Formally, a change of regime would not impact on our perceptions since Indian state practice does not admit of regime recognition.
Barring a serious divergence of views on questions of our national interest, therefore, the new regimes in these countries would not have an adverse impact on our bilateral relations.
On the contrary, hard economic and geo-political interests would ensure harmonious relationships.
In the final analysis therefore the changes, voluntary and expressive of popular will, are to be welcomed.
We know only too well that democratic institution-building requires commitment as well as patience and a temper of tolerance.
The transition to a democratic system would be genuine and durable as long as it is autonomous.
Suggestions of imposition would be a negation of both.
There is, of course, another scenario to be reckoned with.
Shri Jatti also served as a minister in Governments of Bombay and Karnataka state; Lieutenant Governor of Pondicherry and Governor of Odisha.
His term as Chairman, Rajya Sabha was hailed by the members of both Houses of Parliament for his abilities, scholarship, profoundity, humility and friendliness.
His colleagues found him to be simple, self effacing, affable, but utterly fearless, resolute and reliable.
He was the founder President of the "Basava Samithi", a socio-religious organization, which has been in the forefront in propagating the philosophy, life and teachings of the 12th century saint, philosopher and social reformer, Basaveshwara.
Basava fought against the injustice and inequality in society, especially the inhuman caste system.
He spread social awareness and preached equality of all human beings and championed the eradication of untouchability.
His teachings were based on rational, progressive social thoughts.
His universal message of unity of mankind, equality, brotherhood, and compassion, which transcends religious boundaries, is not only contemporary but most relevant for building a modern, progressive society in the 21st century.
In this regard, I am pleased that the Basava Samithi is commemorating the Birth Centenary of its founder President by translating the socio-spiritual hymns, also called Vachanas, of Basaveshwara and his contemporaries into all the 22 languages recognized under our Constitution.
This will ensure greater access to this treasure house of saintly wisdom and knowledge for those who are beyond the realm of Kannada language.
I have the pleasure and privilege of releasing today the first phase of Vachanas translated into Hindi, Urdu, English, Tamil, Telugu, Marathi, Punjabi, Bengali and Sanskrit, including Kannada.
On a similar occasion some years back a distinguished predecessor of mine was hesitant to speak in the Governors Conference on the plea that he was neither fish nor fowl.
He nevertheless complied with the command of the President of the Republic, and so would I.
The past two days have been educative.
I join others in thanking Rashtrapati ji for convening this Conference.
I would like to comment on a few aspects of what has been discussed yesterday and today.
The first relates to internal security.
Several speakers referred to communal tensions, ethnic violence and religious extremism, and to the dangers emanating from them.
It is evident that our social fabric is under stress.
Given the plurality of our society, secularism is not an option but a necessity.
Nor is it a mantra; instead, it is the practice of dos and don'ts that unite the citizen body and prevent or minimise divisions.
It is premised on justice, equality and fraternity, in law and in fact.
It goes beyond tolerance and requires acceptance.
We know that conflicts develop in the mind of humans.
The corrective too lies in the minds.
Collection of information about those who deviate, and punishing them, is necessary but not sufficient.
We need to get into the interstices of the thought process of extremists.
A substantive reflection of this, perhaps occasionally in the Governor's reports could become a useful input in policy making.
Many of the issues were identified in the Conference of Vice Chancellors; others have been highlighted by Hon'ble Governors.
With regard to the first, it is said that the Chancellor of a university should be seen infrequently, and heard rarely!
If this arrangement is to be changed, it will involve amendments to legislative enactments and, in the current climate, be time consuming.
Besides, it will dilute the authority of the vice chancellors and not necessarily improve matters.
Responsibility has to be enforced, not transferred.
While each is important and essential, I feel a priority should be given to quality.
It is a fact that our standards have declined, our academic output and research has declined, our commitment to academic and scientific excellence has declined.
The Constitution endows the Governor of a State with a set of responsibilities.
The Governor is also an integral part of the legislature of the State.
The recommendation was reiterated in 1998.
These have been completely ignored.
Rashtrapati ji himself has had occasion to comment on this.
Adverse comments have come from all sections of the public.
I welcome all the participants, especially those from abroad, who have joined us today.
The Conference is expected to provide the doctors and experts from India and abroad an interactive platform to share experiences and update themselves on newer knowledge and techniques in the treatment of clubfoot disease.
It is estimated that in India there are more than 10 million persons with locomotor disabilities.
Until two years ago, Polio was a major cause of disability.
In India it is estimated that over 50,000 children are born with clubfoot every year making it an important factor of disability amongst our children.
Until recently many children with clubfoot were treated surgically, which is not only an expensive but a less than fully satisfactory option due to relatively poor long-term results.
Apparently, now a new method -The Ponseti Method- can correct the foot deformity in children in a more cost effective and efficient manner.
Its relevance in low resource setting cannot be over estimated.
The Ponseti method, I am told, is now the standard of all National Clubfoot programs across the globe.
I am happy to learn that this simple but effective method is being adopted for treating children born with clubfoot in India.
It is particularly heartening to know that a large number of poor and deprived patients are able to access this method of treatment.
I commend the National Rural Health Mission for partnering in this program of early identification of children with clubfoot.
This is a major step forward in disability prevention, as an early intervention yields better results.
I congratulate all the Professors, doctors and experts, including members of CURE International India for this commendable initiative.
I hope that this partnership will lead to making India free from disability caused by clubfoot.
This would be a major achievement given the grave physical, economic and social consequences of the disease on the patient and his family.
I am happy to be here today for the inauguration of the newly built international & domestic terminals and upgraded air side facilities at the Chennai Airport.
The magnificent terminals are a testimony to excellent job done by the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Airports Authority of India.
Chennai Airport is the premier international gateway and air hub for South India, besides being the third busiest airport in the country.
The importance of Chennai as a national and international destination is well established.
Consequently, passenger and freight traffic to and from these countries is bound to rise in the times to come.
With Chennai being the natural gateway due to geographical proximity, the upgrade and modernisation of the airport is a timely and appropriate initiative.
The existing terminals had a capacity to handle 6 million domestic and 3 million international passengers.
With the upgrade and expansion, the new international and domestic terminals can handle an additional 4 million international and 10 million domestic passengers per annum.
These terminals have also been equipped with state-of-the-art facilities for comfort and convenience of passengers.
As a vital infrastructure, civil aviation plays an essential role in economic progress and integration of a country.
It has an important role to play in promotion of travel, trade and tourism.
It provides speedy access to normally inaccessible areas of the country thereby gives the required stimulus to business activity and economic growth.
During natural calamities, harsh weather conditions, as in places like Leh, Kargil & the Islands, air transport is the most viable mode.
Civil Aviation also makes a vital contribution in integrating the country with the rest of the world.
Better air services help to improve the competitiveness of industry and exports.
Air transport in India has witnessed unprecedented growth in the recent past.
During the last 10 Years, compounded annual growth rate of passenger traffic has been approximately 15%.
I am told that Government of India has already given in principle approval for development of 15 greenfield airports.
Airports Authority of India is also upgrading and modernizing 35 non-metro airports in the country.
These steps will definitely help in providing a better facilities and connectivity to the citizens in coming decades.
I take this opportunity to congratulate the Ministry of Civil Aviation for its good work in this area.
I have no doubt that this improved infrastructure will contribute to the growth, prosperity & development of the country.
I dedicate the new terminals and the facilities at Chennai Airport to the nation.
I wish the people of India, especially of Tamil Nadu, & others utilizing the new facilities at Chennai Airport Bon Voyage.
For it to be unveiled on the anniversary of his martyrdom does bestow on it a significance of its own.
Professor Mushirul Hasan's book goes beyond traditional biography and standard history.
History through themes is how it proceeds.
It sheds light on aspects of the Mahatma's life and work that we know about but may not have analysed sufficiently.
Any effort by way of a corrective is thus to be welcomed.
Professor Mushirul Hasan's focus is on analysing two specific aspects of Gandhi ji's thought and action.
Most discussions on the last phase of British rule in India refer to the role of the Muslim segment of the population of British India.
Instead, the decision to accept the British plan for partition was the result of a political adjustment at the elite level.
It was many Muslims of eminence who objected to it.
The names and sources cited on pages 454-55 tell their own story.
The book provokes thinking.
Its argument propels the reader to revisit some of our certitudes pertaining to that critical period of our recent history.
Finally, and on this day in the calendar it is relevant to recall, as the author has done, the first seven lines of Bob Dylan's song My God They Killed Him.
I am happy to be here today for the inauguration of the Partnership Summit 2013 on the theme ‘Global Partnerships for Enduring Growth’ organized by the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), in association with our Ministry of Commerce and Industry.
I commend the Organisers for this initiative at a time when the world is grappling with vexing economic issues and seeking solutions for them.
I felicitate Uttar Pradesh for being the partner state at the Summit.
Over the last few years, we have seen a slowdown in the global economy.
Governments in the European Union continue to be weighed down with daunting economic challenges.
The impact of this is felt in the emerging economies also with their exports to the developed markets hardest hit.
So is the case with the much needed foreign direct and portfolio investments.
Consequently, growth in most emerging economies has faltered, though strong monetary and fiscal measures adopted by many governments have mitigated to some extent the negative impact.
Partnerships, therefore will assume great significance, and will be instrumental in accelerating economic recovery for many countries.
While doing so, they must be mindful of the need to balance growth with sustainability as also of corporate social responsibility.
In terms of economic growth, India weathered the global economic crises relatively well.
Timely stimulus packages and other measures coupled with strong domestic demand helped to a great extent.
The Government has addressed the issues of fiscal deficit, high inflation, negative trade balance with the world, flagging exports with a slew of measures.
The challenge before us is to restore as soon as possible the high growth trajectory, along with adequate employment generation, in a sustainable and inclusive manner.
This would be the necessary condition for addressing the primary challenges of poverty alleviation and socio-economic development confronting us.
It is to be hoped that the ideas and proposals emanating from your discussions here would facilitating the attainment of this objective.
In conclusion, I thank the organizers for having invited me and wish the Partnership Summit 2013 all success.
I am happy to be here today for the commemoration of the Third National Voters' Day organized by Election Commission of India, which also coincides with its Foundation Day.
The credit for this goes to the Election Commission that has, over six decades, conducted 15 elections to the Lok Sabha and about 350 elections to State Legislative Assemblies.
An idea of the magnitude and complexity of our electoral process can be gauged from the fact that in the 2009 General Election the electorate numbered more than 714 million.
It was catered to by 10 lakh polling booths in which about 50 lakh personnel were deployed.
360 parties put forth candidates.
The high standards set by the Election Commission in election management are now globally recognized.
In fact, the Commission is now sharing its resources on election management with other countries through the India International Institute of Democracy and Election Management.
I commend the Election Commission for undertaking this exercise.
I also congratulate the 10 young voters from Delhi, who have just received their Voter ID Cards.
I also urge millions across the country to value their vote and the importance of exercising their right to vote in an informed and ethical manner for the betterment of our democracy.
It is a matter of satisfaction that the Election Commission has taken up a systematic and sustained programme for voters' education and electoral participation.
The results of these efforts have been quite visible in the last few general elections in the states as we have even seen consistent increase in voters' participation.
Friends Despite our achievements, we cannot rest on our laurels.
Perfection is a matter of receding horizons.
The experience of six decades propels us examine it critically.
Such a conscious rejection would be preferable to abstention from voting.
The procedural modality for bringing this about can be worked out on the model of some of the democracies where it is in vogue.
Its limitation is evident from the factual data.
This figure went down to 58.09 percent in 1957.
In the 13th, 14th, and 15th general elections in 1999, 2004, and 2009 respectively, it was 60.03, 75.87 and 82.68 respectively.
The conclusion is inescapable that a majority of elected members of the Lok Sabha in recent years, and even earlier, won on a minority of votes cast in their constituencies.
Furthermore, this system encourages candidates to focus on securing votes of a segment of the electorate and thereby accentuate or reinforce social divisions based on narrower considerations that derogate from inclusiveness and promote divisive tendencies and social conflict.
For a mature democracy like ours, both these limitations of our electoral system require to be addressed.
I extend my felicitations to the Election Commission of India on its Foundation Day and for its services to the nation.
Jai Hind
I commend Times Now for instituting these Awards.
Locating the recipients would have been a journey of discovery for the jury.
By bestowing recognition on these achievers, we are reinforcing our faith in the innate goodness of human beings and their capacity to do good to others.
The Awards cover the most relevant socio-economic aspects of our society and the challenges it faces in areas of health, education, employment, gender issues and environment.
Each of these is a critical ingredient of sustainable, inclusive, socioeconomic growth and development.
Progress on each of these counts adds to the effort to make our society modern, progressive, and prosperous.
It helps us develop and project a just and humane face.
Friends, Nation-building is a societal endeavour and cannot be limited to governmental efforts alone.
Citizens and citizen bodies have to be active participants in it.
It has to be guided by principles of public welfare and based on the principles of equality, fraternity, social justice and democracy inscribed in the Constitution.
Success stories and role models become critical in such pursuits.
They inject grit, hope and optimism.
They are energized by the values and objectives that are dear to us as a people.
They are shining examples of the strength of human mind and determination.
Our awardees today have shown that every individual contribution is of value to the collective good.
Their work should inspire us in our own callings in life.
Archaic perceptions and practices, disruptive of social progress, must be eschewed.
Gender equality, and gender sensitivity, must be observed in practice and at all times.
I take this opportunity to salute and congratulate the awardees for their outstanding work and valuable contributions to society.
Towards our sustainable future It is an honour to be invited to deliver the 6th Moonis Raza memorial lecture.
Professor Moonis Raza, Moonis bhai to his friends and acquaintances of my generation, was more than an academic.
Contemporaries like Athar Parvez saheb have recorded for posterity his informal mannerism on visits to Aligarh years after he left the campus.
This trait of his personality has been recalled by many others in later years in Delhi.
Moonis saheb's tenure as Vice Chancellor of Delhi University is remembered as productive in terms of overall growth and educational activities.
His academic calling was that of a geographer with a focus on human geography.
He taught that culture, society, economics and politics all contribute to our changing natural environment and that it is only by appreciating these factors that we can make sense of the complex relationships between people and places and prepare for the challenges that lie ahead.
The Report focused on three dimensions of sustainable development: environment, the economy and community.
Inspired by this, an attempt was made to promote sustainability in higher education through the Talloires Declaration of 1990.
By placing people, rather than territories, at the centre of the security rubric, we developed the concept of ‘human security’.
This goes beyond traditional notions of national and military security and includes issues such as development and respect for human rights.
It provides an integrated comprehensive framework for designing, developing and evaluating humanitarian affairs and capacity building initiatives in emergency, transitional and development contexts.
In large measure, human security is dependent on peoples’ access to natural resources and vulnerabilities to environmental change — and a substantial part of environmental change is directly and indirectly affected by human activities and conflicts.
The environment thus impacts human survival, well-being and dignity —all aspects of human security.
Consequently, the human security approach is tied intrinsically to the idea of sustainable human development, which envisions not only generating economic growth but distributing its benefits equitably, regenerating the environment rather than destroying it, and empowering people rather than marginalizing them.
It is increasingly apparent that approaches to development, based merely on economic values are insufficient.
There is a need for a broader emphasis on sustainable development.
While some environmental problems are localized, others are widespread and can have an impact on future generations.
The challenge is to make this understanding work for all people everywhere, including poor and marginalised.
The jubilation of reaching a consensus at Paris COP has been tempered with caution and criticism.
This may put at risk the immediate goals and commitments to mitigating climate change impact and promoting sustainability.
Sustainable development cannot be achieved by technological solutions, political regulation or financial instruments alone.
We need to change the way we think and act.
This requires education and learning for sustainable development, at all levels and in all social contexts, to enable us to, constructively and creatively, address present and future global challenges and create more sustainable and resilient societies.
Nor can individual initiatives be underplayed since environmental pollution or degradation is as much an individual act as a community one.
Practiced consistently, small steps facilitate both gradual evolution and rapid revolution for lasting positive change.
No one among us, whatever our status, strength or circumstance can remain unaffected.
The process of change challenges present international policies.
The two are inseparably intertwined, contingent upon and flowing from each other.
A couplet of Mirza Ghalib comes to mind; an optimist would say that both remain work in progress.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be here today for the inauguration of the Fourth Annual All India Institute of Medical Sciences Physiotherapy Conference.
I take this opportunity to welcome the participants of the Conference and the distinguished guests who are present here today.
Friends, I dare say that coming to the AIIMS for a formal function like today’s is always a comforting thought since the Institute is the foremost centre of excellence in the field of health care, health education & research in our country.
The credit for this goes the outstanding professionals of this institution who work hard and with commitment to render high quality and affordable services to all sections of our society.
Physiotherapy, as this audience knows well, is the treatment of a disease, deformity or malfunction, by distinct therapeutic measures like exercises, heat, light, water, electrical currents etc.
More importantly, Physiotherapy has both curative and preventive aspects.
Its affordability and relative facility in administering the required “medicine” makes it an integral and critical part of any recovery and rehabilitation program for patients.
It is like walking towards receding horizons.
New ideas, methods and technologies need to constantly emerge for better addressing the existing and emerging challenges.
In this regard, theoretical research in relevant areas, coupled with development of modern techniques and technologies, are a sine qua non for providing a truly holistic health care system.
It is expected that the Conference will provide a useful platform to professionals from India and aboard for sharing latest knowledge, best practices, resources and clinical expertise, which will contribute in bringing a significant and positive change in the health care delivery system.
I congratulate the organizers and the participants for this laudable initiative and convey my best wishes for a successful Conference.
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, I am delighted to visit the historic Ho Chi Minh City today, without which my visit to Vietnam would have been incomplete.
I would like to compliment Your Excellency for your outstanding leadership of the city for over six years and wish you good health and ever greater success in the New Year and beyond.
It is a treasure house of Vietnamese history.
India is looking forward to working with Vietnam in the preservation of the Champa heritage site at My Son.
India is committed to work together with the ASEAN region in general, and with Vietnam in particular, to enhance security, achieve greater economic prosperity, and enhanced connectivity.
May I now request you all to join me in a toast to:
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, I am delighted to be in Hanoi for the closing ceremony of the India-Vietnam Friendship Year.
We are at a historic juncture in our bilateral relations.
The year 2012 marked the 40th anniversary of establishment of our full diplomatic relations and the 5th anniversary of our strategic partnership.
I would like to thank the Vietnam Union of Friendship Organizations for having taken this initiative in organizing this event.
The splendid monuments of the Champa civilization at My Son and the universal philosophy of love and compassion of Lord Buddha are living symbols of the cultural interface between our civilizations.
Prime Minister Nehru was the first foreign leader to personally visit Vietnam and congratulate its leaders one week after the great victory at Dien Bien Phu in October 1954.
I am particularly happy to be here today with successive generations of Vietnamese students, scholars, officials and others who have studied in India.
Each one of you personally symbolizes the warm feelings and fraternal friendship between India and Vietnam.
All of you, in diverse ways, have further strengthened our close relations.
I would specially like to thank the Vietnam Union of Friendship Organizations and to thank Vietnam-India Friendship Association and its many chapters in Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh City and other provinces and cities of Vietnam for being true Ambassadors of India and Indian culture.
India values its relations with Vietnam.
Our shared interests and aspirations form the basis of our relations.
It was said by Late Prime Minister Pham Van Dong that our relations are as blue as the clear sky without any clouds.
Today, we can look forward towards the future with confidence.
Over the years, the commitment shown by the leadership in the two countries resulted in the signing of the Joint Declaration Cooperation Framework in 2003, which culminated in the establishment of a "Strategic Partnership" in 2007.
Our partnership is based on a common vision, shared interests and mutual trust and friendship.
It is for mutual benefit and for regional peace, stability and prosperity.
We share a strategic understanding and cooperation at regional and multilateral forums.
Vietnam has emerged as a regional power in South-East Asia with political stability and a dynamic economy.
We are confident of achieving it.
We need to generate greater awareness about mutually beneficial business opportunities, thereby facilitating trade and investment.
Indian companies have ventured into Vietnam in increasing numbers with investments in diverse sectors and in several provinces.
Indian companies in the field of oil and gas exploration are already actively engaged in several projects in Vietnam.
India is also prepared to continuing extending lines of credit on concessional terms, especially for infrastructure development.
India has been a long-standing partner in Vietnam's development process.
Our cooperation in diverse areas such as agriculture, science and technology, education, capacity building and human resource development is growing.
We enjoy robust cooperation in the areas of defence and security.
We are strengthening our cooperation in the field of Human Resource Development and Capacity Building.
Our cultural ties rooted in antiquity are growing stronger.
The opening of the Indian Cultural Centre in Hanoi this year will bring to the people of Vietnam a flavour of India.
It would greatly facilitate our cultural ties and promote people-to-people contacts.
During our 'Year of Friendship' we have both organized several commemorative events, cultural performances, seminars and business promotion events.
The decision to set up the Institute of Indian and South West Asian Studies, under the aegis of Vietnam Academy of Social Sciences is a testimony to the desire on both sides to engage more closely.
We will continue our support for the activities of the Institute.
The year 2012 also marked the 20th anniversary of India's relationship with ASEAN.
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, I am delighted to be in a country that holds a special place in the hearts of the Indian people.
I congratulate all those who contributed to making the Friendship Year a great success.
Vietnam and India share a long tradition of close relations.
Its foundations were laid by our great leaders, Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru and President Ho Chi Minh.
Successive generations of our leaders - and here I would specially like to recall Prime Ministers Indira Gandhi and Pham Van Dong - nurtured this friendship.
Vietnam’s rapid economic and social development resulting in increased prosperity for your people is commendable.
The success of your efforts in achieving the Millennium Development Goals are worthy of emulation.
I congratulate the leadership and people of Vietnam for their success in reducing poverty from 58 percent to less than 10 percent in two decades.
Excellency Today Vietnam and India have a Strategic Partnership founded on a common vision, shared interests and mutual trust and friendship.
We are convinced that it will promote peace, stability and security in this region and the world.
The agreements and MoUs that we have signed today will open new avenues for bilateral cooperation.
We value our strategic understanding and cooperation at regional and multilateral forums like ASEAN, Mekong-Ganga Cooperation, East Asia Summit, ASEM and international organisations like the United Nations and WTO.
We deeply appreciate Vietnam's support to India's candidature as a permanent member of an expanded UN Security Council.
As two developing countries with a stake in the future, we must take advantage of our synergies to jointly face emerging challenges and also to exploit new opportunities.
We wish to bring together the exchange of ideas and culture, with a contemporary face, to our ancient bonds of friendship.
To facilitate these ties and promote people-to people contacts, we plan to open the Indian Cultural Centre in Hanoi this year.
At the outset, I wish everyone a very happy and prosperous New Year.
I also thank the organizers for having invited me for this function.
One of the important functions of a responsible government in a democracy is to provide healthcare coverage to all, especially the marginalized and deprived sections of society.
India also loses a substantial number of lives during the productive years of its citizens.
Similarly, communicable diseases are also major causes of morbidity and mortality leading to lost productivity, missed educational opportunities and a direct negative impact on growth due to high health care costs.
The indirect costs due to negative impact on domestic and international tourism and trade can also be significant.
The provision of quality healthcare has to be a joint effort of the Government; private and the non-profit sector.
These are welcome developments.
The ILBS also has a mandate to be a pioneer in higher medical education and advance research in related areas.
It has introduced first of its kind, post doctoral courses in Hepatology and Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Surgery; Ph.D and Short Term Training Programs for eligible medical and research Scholars.
It is my hope that in the years to come the Institute shall become a model institution and develop the best clinical protocols and operational systems.
I hope the Institute would usher in a new era in delivery of quality and affordable public healthcare to all sections of society.
I wish the Institute every success in the coming years.”
I am happy to be here with you today to inaugurate the Annual Republic Day Camp of the National Cadet Corps.
I extend my best wishes to all of you for a happy and productive New Year.
This smart turn out of cadets representing all states and reflecting the unity in diversity of our great country is heartening.
Participation in this Camp fosters the spirit of camaraderie, patriotism, unity, discipline and public service.
It should be an enriching experience.
It must be utilised to the fullest extent.
The National Cadet Corps is the premier uniformed youth organization of our country and its contribution to nation building deserves highest commendation.
It helps channelise the energy of our youth into a creative force to usher in social change through a wide spectrum of activities that are a powerful instrument for spreading awareness in society at the grass root level.
I am confident that the newly refined training philosophy and curriculum adopted by NCC will give a fresh impetus to these activities.
A recent event on the eve of the New Year gave all of us occasion for remorse and sorrow.
The expressions of anguish and anger, fully justified, must now be speedily translated into comprehensive correctives in laws, procedures, societal norms and values, and social behaviour.
This responsibility must be shouldered by all and discharged by all.
I am informed that during the Camp you will be joined by cadets from friendly foreign countries.
They would be eager to meet, interact and learn from you, and you must do the same.
This would enable you to widen your horizon and foster lasting friendships.
I urge you to continue to discharge your duties with dedication and distinction in the times to come.
I am happy to be here today for the 60th Annual Arts Festival at Kalakshetra in Chennai.
Kalakshetra is an important centre of training and performance, which has produced and molded generations of acclaimed artists in a distinctive style.
Since its establishment, Kalakshetra has been providing a holistic education in arts.
It focuses on Bharatanatyam, Carnatic vocal and instrumental music, the visual arts, traditional crafts and textile design, textual heritage, aesthetics, history and philosophy.
Some of India's most revered artistes have either served on its faculty or are among its alumni.
It is known for its commitment to artistic excellence whether in classrooms, in auditoria or during tours around the world.
As a performance company, Kalakshetra productions are widely recognized for their in-depth research, impeccable technique and refined aesthetics.
Today is a special occasion for many reasons.
Secondly, it is the 60th Annual Arts Festival of this institution which completed seventy five years of its existence last year.
Great institutions use their past – with lessons learnt and traditions imbibed – as the bedrock for embracing the future.
Jayadeva’s Gita Govindam and Kalidasa’s Abijnana Shakuntalam are classic examples of tales from India’s rich literary and performing tradition.
Jayadeva’s Gita Govindam is a glittering gem from our traditions.
It dates back to the twelfth century and has remained a living, throbbing tradition in various cultural contexts and geographic locations.
Edwin Arnold, who first translated it into English in 1875, compared it to Solomon’s Song of Songs in the Old Testament and called it the Indian Song of Songs.
Over the centuries this exquisite literary work with its philosophical undercurrent and its beautiful verses has permeated Indian painting, singing traditions, classical and folk dancing traditions, sculpture as well as chanting and devotional music traditions in our temples.
In fact, its mystical beauty and content were so compelling that in 1615, Emperor Akbar had a manuscript of Gita Govindam produced and illustrated in Mughal style.
I once again thank Gopal krishna Gandhi ji and Kalakshetra for having invited me for this function.
I am happy to be here today to present the K. Karunakaran Foundation’s Best Administrator in India Award to Shri P. Chidambaram, our Finance Minister.
The Best Administrator in India Award instituted by the Karunakaran Foundation is a befitting tribute to the memory of the astute political leader and himself a distinguished administrator, Shri K Karunakaran.
Shri Karunakaran was a popular leader who served the people of Kerala and the country in various capacities with distinction, in a public life spanning over half a century.
As a Parliamentarian, whose career stretched over five decades, Shri Karunakaran was elected three times to Rajya Sabha and twice to Lok Sabha, besides being Member of the Kerala Legislative Assembly for several terms.
He was Chief Minister of the state four times; Minister in the state Cabinet and Union Industries Minister.
Shri Karunakaran’s contribution towards socio-economic development of Kerala is well acknowledged and so is his adeptness in problem solving.
As a Minister in the Union Government, Shri Chidambaram has held the important portfolios like Finance, Home and Commerce.
He has won admiration for his vision, articulation, diligence and determination.
I congratulate Shri Chidambaram on receiving this well deserved award and wish him the very best for his future endeavours in the service of our nation.
I congratulate the K Karunakaran Foundation for this initiative and also thank them for having invited me for this function.
I take this opportunity to congratulate Cardinal Moran Mor Baselios Cleemis Catholicos for his well deserved elevation to Cardinalship last month.
It is a matter of honour for all Indians.
Theologians in times past debated the earlier manifestations of Christmas.
This is of no consequence today.
To Christians and all other citizens of this vast land of many faiths, Christmas is a celebration of the birth of Jesus Christ.
To Mahatma Gandhi he was the greatest teacher humanity has ever had.
Christmas is a festival of peace, harmony and goodwill celebrated around the world by persons of all faiths and beliefs.
It constantly reminds us of the fundamental unity of mankind and commemorates the cherished human values of love, compassion, forgiveness and charity.
Jesus’ life is a message of selfless service and sacrifice in the cause of fellow beings.
His mission was to free humanity from the basic bondage of sin.
Today, when human folly continues to propel us towards hate and conflict in many parts of the World, Jesus’ eternal message of love and forgiveness shows us the path to redemption.
Let us celebrate this joyous occasion by dedicating ourselves to leading our lives on the basis of the teachings and message of Jesus Christ, which are universally relevant.
It would make the world a better place for us to live in.
I wish everyone Merry Christmas and a very Happy and Prosperous New Year!
'Virtue in Public Life' I deem it a privilege to be invited to deliver the Bhimsen Sachar Memorial Lecture today.
Bhimsen Sachar was a freedom fighter, a political activist, an administrator and above all a person who advocated and practiced the core values of our freedom movement.
As Chief Minister of Punjab on more than one occasion in the early years of our Republic, he shouldered the onerous responsibilities of putting in place administrative structures in the aftermath of a major disruption.
He served with distinction as Governor in two of our States.
As a political personality occupying high public office, Bhimsen Sachar would have dealt with questions of governance.
The compact is in the nature of a trust.
Record shows that points of tension arise whenever apprehensions develop about this relationship.
The implications of this for individual and collective conduct are far reaching.
The desire and need for a virtuous society is not just a metaphysical goal which lies in the ethereal realm of religion or philosophy but has tangible benefits for common good of humanity.
Virtue in public life provides a necessary, if not sufficient, framework for sustained and harmonious political, economic and social progress in society.
Allow me to amplify.
Virtue in public life goes beyond the normal clamour for probity in Government and public administration and covers the entire spectrum of a citizen's public activity.
Similarly, virtue is not restricted to absence of corruption in financial or monetary terms, but includes values such as service, sacrifice, faith, trust, courage, justice and ethical conduct.
As the philosopher Aristotle put it, virtue is a disposition for excellence in the human soul.
This virtue can be acquired.
In an article in 'Young India' on October 22, 1925, Gandhi ji listed Seven Social Sins which he considered to be spiritually most perilous for humanity.
These together constitute a good point of reference for any discussion on virtue in public life.
Hence the imperative need for imbibing and implementing them in social, and personal, behaviour patterns.
There can be other approaches to the problem.
The adequacy of these remains a matter of unending debate.
Beyond these, however, and in terms of principles and commitments, there are two aspects of the requirement of probity in public domain.
In the second place, and in our world of today, societies and states no longer have the luxury of isolation.
Instead, we have a community of states and a globalisation of values.
National sovereignty is increasingly circumscribed by national commitments to global conventions.
These, together, give teeth to the principles and behaviour pledges inscribed in the Charter of the United Nations.
This is a comprehensive document, has a direct relevance to the question of probity in public life and its rationale and objectives therefore need to be considered carefully.
The disease is not of recent origin but, in an earlier period, carried a social stigma less evident today.
In 1949 the poet Josh Malihabadi had written a long poem entitled Rishwat.
Furthermore, there is a nagging apprehension that the administrative and judicial mechanism in place is inadequate as a deterrent.
This is essential but not sufficient.
These steps would assist the attainment of "excellence" in terms of the Duties prescribed in the Constitution.
The endeavour is to be individual and collective.
I thank Hon’ble Vice President of Uganda for his gracious presence here today.
I also thank the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry (FICCI), the Private Sector Foundation Uganda and Indian Business Forum (IBF), Uganda for organizing this business event.
Our commercial and business ties with Uganda are dynamic and form a key pillar of our bilateral relations.
I am told that every month, more than 70 Ugandan businessmen travel to India to explore business opportunities with India.
Uganda’s expanding economy offers opportunities in a variety of sectors.
Uganda is blessed with natural resources, including fertile soil and a strong agrarian base, deposits of minerals, and now even, petroleum that has been discovered.
Recent economic reforms have ushered in rapid growth.
Both Uganda and India have a youthful population.
Our young people are our greatest resource.
The Government of India also offers several scholarships and fellowships to Ugandan students to enable them pursue a variety of scholastic and vocational programmes and research courses in India.
India and Uganda have similar demographic profiles and disease burden and face similar challenges related to health and well-being of our populations.
India has been a source of affordable pharmaceuticals and specialized healthcare for people of Africa.
Several Indian hospitals have developed facilities to serve medical cases referred to them from Africa, including from Uganda.
The Indian community in Uganda is vibrant and holds an important position in Ugandan economy in manufacturing, trade and service sectors.
Indian businesses employ thousands of Ugandans and are among the largest contributors to tax revenue in Uganda.
Over the past few years, India has emerged as one of the largest investors and trading partners of Uganda.
This has been possible due to the continued and positive support of the Ugandan Government.
I thank the Government of Uganda for welcoming Indian entrepreneurs who have sought business opportunities in Uganda and I request that the Ugandan government continues with such support and encouragement for our companies seeking business in Uganda.
So, as the Hon'ble Minister has said, you are looking at the market of 350 million people in East Africa and not simply a market of 28 or 30 million people.
And this thought has to sink-in because many of the things which are manufactured and transported here, can just as well they manufactured here with Indian knowledge and expertise for a much wider market in this region.
This is the message my delegation and I are taking back to the Government and the business in India and this is something on which we are going to work together, jointly, for mutual benefit.
I wish the Business Meet success in its deliberations today, I am confident that bilateral relations between the two countries will keep growing and scaling new heights in future.
Thank You.
He considered these traits to be spiritually most perilous for humanity.
It is to be noted that each of these is a statement of principle that can be comprehended, interpreted and implemented individually and collectively.
On my part, I would like to discern a pattern in the last words of each dictum: principle, work, conscience, character, morality, humanity and sacrifice.
In the Gandhian approach, therefore, conscience is motivated by considerations of humanity and sacrifice to develop a moral character that holds aloft in its work the banner of a principled approach.
The reverse would be selfishness inducing an unprincipled, opportunistic, approach to work.
The latter would produce neither justice nor humaneness.
Gandhiji’s message of avoiding these seven social sins provides a philosophical and moral framework for addressing most issues agitating contemporary societies.
Professor Rajput and the other contributors to the volume bring out the continued relevance and importance of Gandhian thought.
Some questions do come to mind.
I thank Professor Rajput for inviting me to release this book.
I am happy to be here today to participate in this function.
Nor can I or many others of my generation forget Anis apa’s residence at 16 Windsor Place; it was a virtual Open House.
A case in point is in the sub-title “Liberal Muslim”.
The terms, used together, qualify each other.
It is a privilege to be called upon to deliver the 2012 Sardar Patel Memorial Lecture.
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel was an iconic personality, a close associate of Gandhiji, a leader in the freedom struggle, a person who along with Jawaharlal Nehru was at the helm of affairs in the early years of our existence as a free country.
The process of integrating 554 large and miniscule States was complex.
It involved intricate negotiations on political, administrative and financial matters as also those relating to the armed forces of these units.
But the real integration had to take place in the minds of the people.
This could not be accomplished overnight.
Nor was this unanticipated; as early as 1902, Rabindranath Tagore had observed that ‘unity cannot be brought about by enacting a law that all shall be one.’ The constitution-making process reflected the concern for national unity.
One aspect of it, legal and structural, put into place a parliamentary democracy; the other pertained to sociological and emotional dimensions.
This was reflected in the end product – a Union of States, described by Ivor Jennings as ‘a federation with strong centralizing tendencies’.
The imperatives of democracy were spelt out with great insight, and foresight, by Babasaheb Ambedkar in the closing days of the work of the Constituent Assembly.
The Conference decided to set up a National Integration Council to address these matters and make recommendations thereon.
The first meeting of the Council was held in June 1962.
To date, fifteen meetings have been held in fifty years, with glaring gaps of over ten years between some of these meetings.
Hard issues agitating the public mind in different regions have come to the fore and seek acceptable solutions.
The human diversities are both hierarchical and spatial.
Each of these also relates to the requirements of fraternity and the achievement of national integration.
Experience shows that its provisions have been used creatively to expand the area of rights, to redress grievances, to allow greater space for federal units in specific areas.
The need of the hour is to reinvigorate this process, to explore and make better use of existing constitutional provisions; above all, to ensure better delivery.
Prescriptions of despair, unwise or impracticable, do not help the process.
A case in point is the working of our federal system.
The underlying major premise is the Rule of Law.
Without it, the carefully calibrated framework of power-sharing, and the jurisdictional allocation spelt out in the Seventh Schedule, become irrelevant.
The only way to do so is through dialogue and adequate flexibility within the framework of the Constitution.
The obvious platform for such a dialogue, besides the Parliament, is the Inter-State Council, belatedly established in 1990 under Article 263 on the recommendation of the Sarkaria Commission.
Its meetings have been infrequent, except in 1997, and the political will to explore its full potential has clearly not been forthcoming.
Nor is the situation any better with regard to the actual implementation of various programmes for uplifting educationally and economically some of the most backward of our minorities.
More instances can be cited.
Each is a manifestation of parochialism that has crept into our body politic.
Each derogates from the requirement of fraternity and thereby affects national integration.
The responsibility for failures is shared by all.
The conclusion is unavoidable that the process of emotional integration has faltered and is in dire need of reinvigoration.
I understand the Conference brings together scholars and practitioners from federal systems across the world to share experiences, and to understand better the design and implementation of environmental policy in federations around the world.
As terrible as these catastrophes would be for us, they can be repaired in a few generations.
The one process now going on that will take millions of years to correct is loss of genetic and species biodiversity by the destruction of natural habitats.
Many of these conflicts result from a poor fit between ecosystems they represent and the institutions designed to manage them.
A course correction is required.
Serious reflection and action is also required on issues of governance and institutional design wherein environment and development are concerned.
Such strengthening of environmental federalism requires us to understand the constitutional provisions within each country to deal with the fine balance between environment and development.
I am happy that the conference has devoted a Session on this issue.
I wish the Conference success in its work over the next two days.
I came to the Centre for Research and Industrial Development (CRRID) almost five years back to deliver the Haksar Memorial Lecture.
A gathering of scholars to discuss Central Asia is relevant for more than one reason.
The region is in our proximate neighbourhood and is therefore of geopolitical salience.
The surprising thing is that we do not know enough about it.
Historically speaking, the geographical term ‘Central Asia’ came into the vocabulary of European scholars and governments only in the middle of the 19th century.
In the year 1900 the famous Russian historian Victor Barthold could find little about the recorded history of the area before the Arab conquest of 7th- 8th centuries.
A seminar organized by the Embassy of India, Tashkent in March 2000 sought to collate available information, mainly archaeological, on the relations between India and Central Asia in the pre-Islamic period.
On the other hand, we do have sufficient evidence of conquerors and conquests, of movement of people, and of trade in the medieval and pre-modern periods.
In more recent times, both Czarist Russia and the Soviet Union kept it a virtually ‘closed’ region.
CRRID is therefore to be complemented for undertaking this initiative of seeking perspectives on the potential for cooperation between Central and South Asia for peace, security and development.
Greater attention also needs to be devoted to language skills and the study of social impulses in individual societies.
Diligent field work is essential for both and must be undertaken.
Its building blocks, instead, consist of ground realities.
Our primary interest was stability in the region.
We were successful in the first and are still struggling with the second.
Culturally, and apart from historical linkages and affinities, the access given to India during Soviet times through the establishment of a consulate general in Tashkent, allowed us to promote educational and commercial exchanges with Uzbekistan.
It is resource rich in terms of oil, gas, gold, cotton, rare-earths, has relatively advanced infrastructure and human capital, and enjoys the benefit of a strategic location between Asia and Europe.
Many of the Central Asian Republics have embarked on market-oriented economic reforms to boost private sector competitiveness and economic performance.
India’s own approach to the region has evolved over these twenty years and has recently been spelt out in its “Connect Central Asia” Policy.
Furtherance of trade and economic co-operation with the region, beginning with Afghanistan, hinges on connectivity which in turn, is intrinsically dependent on access-route options and its policy and practical implications.
The easiest route, through Pakistan and Afghanistan, appears totally dependent on a good mix of human wisdom and divine intervention; both seem elusive in the foreseeable future!
A variant of this for Central Asian states, dependent on the upgrading of railway network in Iran, could be the Iran-Turkmenistan route.
Both would require fine tuning of policy and longer term financial commitments.
Other options, through China or Russia, would be grossly uneconomical.
Other elements of the twelve-point ‘Connect Central Asia’ Policy are in various stages of initiative and implementation and have evoked positive responses from the Central Asian States.
No discussion on Central Asia and its immediate neighbourhood would be complete without taking on board the challenges arising out of the situation in Afghanistan.
The lesson of history is that hegemonic prescriptions do not sustain themselves and result in greater chaos.
Such an approach should be underwritten by the United Nations and all interested powers.
India’s engagement in Central Asia is also part of our belief in a multi-polar world.
The world of tomorrow cannot and must not be visualized on the patterns of a past that resulted in misery and bloodshed.
India wishes to eschew archaic concepts of Great Game and Grand Chessboard and, instead, be a partner for peace, stability and economic development in the region.
India also hopes that the people of Central Asia do not give quarter to fundamentalism and religious extremism in their respective societies since these trends are disruptive and hamper progress.
I wish the Seminar success in its deliberations and thank the CRRID for inviting me today.
Jai Hind
I am privileged to be here today for the inaugural session of the seventh meeting of Women Speakers of Parliament, organized by the IPU, on the theme ‘Gender Sensitive Parliaments’.
Its stated purpose is to highlight the role of women Speakers as catalysts for generating gender sensitivity in legislatures.
In the words of a Human Development Report, they “must be regarded as agents and beneficiaries of change.
This calls for serious reflection.
In the first place, we need some conceptual clarity.
They pertain to the core of social organization, to economic and political structures and relationships.
More importantly, they relate to attitudes, prejudices and stereotypes that translate into certain unacceptable social value judgments.
Correctives therefore are imperative at the base of the social pyramid.
Gender sensitivity, in other words, is more a bottom-up process rather than a top-down one.
Legislative bodies can, and must, contribute to it in full measure.
This is necessary but not sufficient.
More remains to be done.
Global data tells its own story.
In 1990, the United Nation’s Economic and Social Council endorsed a target of 30 per cent women in decision-making positions in the world by 1995.
By that year, however, only 10 per cent of the world’s parliamentarians were women.
The situation is no better today.
According to a recent IPU survey, the world average of Women Members of both the Houses combined constitutes only 20 per cent of the total.
National experiences are relevant.
The gender profile in the Parliament of India is woefully lopsided with women constituting only around 11 percent of the total membership.
Legislation reserving 33 percent of seats for women was passed in one House and has since been pending in the other.
On the other hand, a constitutional amendment in 1993 mandated reservation of one-third seats for women at the local level bodies, namely, the Panchayats and Municipalities.
This has been a historic beginning for the effective participation of women in the decision-making process at the grassroots level.
Today, women number 1.2 million among the nearly 2.8 million representatives elected to local bodies.
Before reservations, the percentage of women in this area was merely 4.5 per cent; now it has gone up to 40 per cent.
This is perhaps the largest ever representation of women in elected bodies anywhere in the world.
I wish the Meeting all success.
Thank you.
My visit today, nevertheless, is occasion specific.
It is to formally inaugurate the Centre for Qur’an Studies, established in memory of the late Professor Khaliq Ahmad Nizami sahib.
It also demands quality in the world of today wherein standards are perforce global.
This, then, is the challenge.
The Aligarh fraternity - students, teachers and well wishers – need to prepare for the future, to march in step with fellow citizens, to contribute in adequate measure to public good and to benefit from it fairly.
Our gratitude to Sir Syed is often a ritualistic exercise.
Some, but not many, remember the three distinct yet interconnected aspects of his work.
Each required hard work, a open mind and the attainment of excellence.
Aligarh contributed to it in good measure but could have done more.
When we introspect, we need to be candid.
I enquired why these practices were not observed in daily life outside the mosque.
All of us need to think about this dichotomy and its implications for the work we undertake in this institution.
I may be forgiven for admitting that I am moderately conservative and tolerably radical – conservative in habits and radical in thinking.
The presence here of Mr. N. Ram and Professor Romila Thapar provides further reassurance.
Having jettisoned my misgivings, I am happy to be here today for the re-launch of the ‘Frontline’.
I understand that in its new avatar the magazine would have attractive photo essays on art, culture, heritage, wildlife, environment and land & people.
It will also have new columns on media and literature, snapshots on developments in India, a science notebook, apart from in-depth analyses of the social, political and economic issues of the day.
‘Frontline’ subscribes to it in full measure and will, I am confident, continue to do so.
The theme of the debate scheduled for today, on some of the core values of our Constitution, is sufficiently serious, focused and relevant, and testifies to it.
Despite this, there remains a real and popular demand for serious publications on topical issues which cannot be substituted by the ‘breaking news’ culture and short-attention span snippets in the domain of the electronic media.
I commend the editors and publishers for this initiative aimed at retaining relevance in changing times for a newer readership.
I wish ‘Frontline’ continued success in the service of discerning readers
Last month, we in India, had the privilege to welcome His Excellency President Paul Kagame as a special guest at the Vibrant Gujarat event.
This gesture was instrumental in consolidating further our bilateral relationship.
This, I understand, has been possible due to the foresight and sagacious vision of the leadership and the hard work of the people.
We in India see ourselves as a strong development partner to Rwanda.
We are already cooperating in sectors such as solar electrification, food processing, skill development and hydropower projects.
During President Kagame’s recent visit an understanding has been reached for a new line of credit worth $ 80 million for a road project.
We are also committed to continuing and enhancing the provision of scholarships for training of Rwandan civilians and defence personnel under various technical cooperation and cultural cooperation programmes.
Our bilateral trade has doubled over the last five years, but at US $ 106 million, remains modest and much below its potential.
Rwanda has a dynamic economy and ranks highly in the ease of doing business, providing many incentives for investors.
We share with Rwanda, this strong desire to provide stable democratic governance and opportunities for growth and prosperity of our people.
Yesterday, I had the pleasure of inaugurating, jointly with Prime Minister Murekezi, the Rwanda-India Business Forum that will bring together business partners from our two countries.
We also inaugurated an exhibition that showcases some of the more useful and cost-effective innovations from Indian industry that can be adapted for use here.
On our part, we continue to encourage Indian companies to be bolder and more imaginative in seizing the opportunities that Rwanda presents.
This new-found confidence and developmental zeal is best demonstrated by your own country whose economic performance has been termed ‘remarkable’ by the International Monetary Fund.
The imperatives that drive African-Indian engagement are based on our shared challenges, common interests, and perceptions of mutual benefit.
The first imperative comes from our shared history and cultural links.
India owes an unforgettable debt of gratitude to Africa’s role in inspiring our struggle for national liberation.
It was on this continent that Mahatma Gandhi developed and first practised the concepts of non-violence and peaceful resistance that won India its freedom.
Our present choices are informed by our shared experience of anti-colonial struggle against exploitation and racial discrimination.
They contribute to the growth of local economy and provide a link between their adopted homes and their country of origin.
The second imperative comes from our complementary strengths and capacities that make us natural economic and commercial partners.
India provides a long-term, stable and profitable market to the goods and services that Africa generates.
For India, Africa has the potential to become a major contributor to our energy security and food security requirements.
This is a ‘win-win’ situation.
India is increasingly an important source of investment for projects in Africa, which span diverse sectors such as pharmaceuticals, information technology and telecommunications, engineering, education, health and agriculture.
Indian private sector has been a pioneer in making investments in Africa, contributing to generation of employment and growth in the countries receiving such investments.
The quantum of Indian investments in Africa has increased in recent years and is presently estimated to be about $ 35 billion, with a large part of it concentrated in Southern and Eastern Africa.
Agro business initiatives have been a crucial component in our commercial exchange.
Indian successes in agriculture have taken place in the context of low capital intensive farming and varied climatic conditions, which can be of relevance to Africa.
Furthermore, the growing middle-class in urban India can become a dependable consumer for African food processing industry.
In order to address the trade imbalance and diversify the trade basket, India has already offered duty-free access to Indian markets, with very few exceptions, for all the Least Developed Countries of Africa.
The third imperative comes from our common approach in meeting development challenges towards building a sustainable future for our people.
The African leadership is aware of India’s domestic experience and success in developing a vibrant manufacturing and services sector, while encouraging inclusiveness at societal level.
Africa and India can thus learn much from each other in terms of capacity building, program implementation and innovation.
Our development cooperation engagement with Africa is unique, based on mutual benefits while contributing to Africa’s development objectives through a consultative process.
A wide range of areas have been covered including agriculture, small and medium enterprises, science and technology, health, education, culture, infrastructure, energy, communications, civil society and governance.
Our partnership model is premised on human resource development and institution building in partner countries.
To support our development cooperation in Africa, the Government of India has announced concessional credit of over $ 10 billion, over a period of next five years, in addition to the ongoing credit lines.
A grant assistance of $ 600 million has also been announced, including $ 100 million for the India Africa Development Fund and $ 10 million for the India Africa Health Fund.
The grant assistance will also cover more than 50,000 scholarships for African students in India over the next five years.
The fourth imperative for our cooperation comes from a shared perspective on addressing peace and security related issues and a convergence of views on matters global.
We share similar views and positions on a variety of global concerns, ranging from combating terrorism and piracy to coordinating our positions in global forums over issues such as reforms at the United Nations, world trade and climate change.
The reform of political, security and economic institutions of global governance has been a key area of such cooperation, with both Africa and India underlining the urgency of undertaking such reforms, including a meaningful expansion of the United Nations Security Council.
The threat of terrorism has emerged as a major impediment in our quest for peace and prosperity for our people.
The spreading tide of terrorism and extremism is a threat that all civilised societies face today.
In India we face the threat from across our borders.
Terrorist action and violence cannot be justified on any grounds.
India also remains committed to ensuring stability and peace in Africa under a genuine multilateral effort led by United Nations.
In pursuance of this commitment, India has over 6000 personnel committed to UN peacekeeping duties in Africa.
In addition, we have worked bilaterally with our African partners to enhance defence training and capacity building in security domains.
The Forum provided an opportunity for the African leaders to explore what India offered to them.
The outcome document of the summit –“Delhi Declaration” and “Framework for Strategic Partnership”- reflected the common positions of India and Africa on a wide array of political and economic issues as well as an articulation of our joint commitment to deepening our mutual cooperation.
The meeting provided a new direction to Africa- India relations based on equality, mutual respect and shared gains in addition to identifying broad areas of cooperation in political, economic and social development.
These developments are but a start.
I am delighted to be back in Srinagar and in the midst of so many scientific minds of our country who have gathered here for the 8th JK Science Congress.
It is commendable that such a state-level conference has been held regularly since 2005.
The theme of the conference: Science, Technology and Regional Development: Opportunities & Challenges is relevant to our times in local, national and global terms.
This audience knows well that modern India’s romance with science and technology commenced in the early days of our independence.
Its foundations were laid by the Science Policy Resolution of 1958 and the Technology Policy Statement of 1963.
While the first aimed at fostering science and scientific research and ensuring adequate availability of research scientists, the second aimed at self reliance and maximum use of indigenous resources.
As a result of these and other initiatives, significant progress was made in higher education in science and technology, in the establishment of industrial research laboratories and in fields like atomic energy, space, agriculture, drugs and pharmaceuticals.
Experience of three decades also revealed, in the words of a competent observer, “the distance between the rhetoric of self reliance and the actual level of technological development and innovation in Indian industry”.
Further adjustments in policy were therefore made in 1993 and 2003 to respond to new requirements of our economy in the light of changed and changing national and global conditions.
The objective, he added, is to take it to 2 percent by the end of the XII Plan.
It is thus evident that in order to emerge as an effective knowledge power for the welfare of people, stronger capabilities and a more integrated view of Science and technology is required.
This, besides enhanced financial support, would need more effective mechanisms to catch and encourage talent.
An essential concomitant would be a new culture of research, greater autonomy and sufficient freedom of dissent.
Research is one aspect of the matter, development leading to technological innovation is another.
This, in turn, contributes in varying measures to the production of economically relevant public goods.
Innovation thus becomes an index of progress and development.
Some institutional push to encourage innovation in our society has emanated from The National Innovation Foundation – India since its inception in the year 2000.
The results remain modest as is evident from the number of patents registered.
"In order to unleash India’s Innovation potential, an essential step	is systematic reform of the higher education system in India which would act as an enabler for developing the required intellectual capital as well as in laying the foundation for effective collaboration between industry and	educational institutions."
"It could be argued that Innovation, Education	(including Vocational Education) and Entrepreneurship are three ends of a triangle, each of which is related to the other."
The Report went on to say that another external barrier is the lack of effective collaboration between industry and research conducted in universities and R&D institutions.
The same holds for vocational training and skills development and its potential for employment opportunities.
Some of this is underway through various government and private sector schemes.
Given the demographic advantage of a young population, and the ageing population profile of European and East Asian countries, there is clear case of benefiting from a comparative cost advantage in the foreseeable future.
II A discourse in conceptual terms on wider national perceptions is one aspect of the matter.
This Conference has a focus on the State of Jammu and Kashmir and should, rightly, seek a transition from the macrocosm to microcosm and focus on the developmental challenges it faces.
Similarly, various Doctoral and Post Doctoral fellowships to promote the interest in Research can be availed of.
This is a moral obligation apart from being a functional one.
Vocational training has to be linked to employability and therefore to different segments of local economy.
Acquiring excellence in traditional crafts results in value addition.
Similarly, training in service skills needed by the tourism sector could add considerably to employment generation.
Agricultural research is an area of critical importance.
It includes horticulture, forests, sericulture, fisheries, animal husbandry and allied fields.
It is pivotal to the economy of J&K as it contributes more than 50 percent to the net domestic product of the State and is the main source of livelihood for around 80 percent of the population.
Over 80 percent of net sown area is of food crops and only 42 percent of the area is under irrigation.
A large number of people are dependent on cattle rearing and sheep breeding.
The productivity in this sector, however, is low and the State depends on imports of animal products.
Facilities for processing of wool are virtually non-existent.
A good percentage of people are connected directly or indirectly with the horticulture sector in the state.
Yet, productivity is low and the sector suffers from low investment, disadvantage of location, poor infrastructure and the presence of many layers of intermediation.
Food security too is an area of regional concern which needs scientific efforts for improvements.
Better weather forecasting is one of the critical aspects for agricultural management.
Biotechnology along with information technology has emerged as a core area of economic development particularly on issues relating to food security.
There is scope for implementation of the biotechnological techniques and tools for better crop yield for securing improvements in horticulture which is the backbone of the State economy.
Medical institutions in the State have earned a good reputation.
One last thought.
Modern communication techniques have made this much easier.
I am confident that this Conference will discuss the role of science and technology in developmental process of the State and come up with the measures to respond to challenges that lie ahead.
It should identify measures to eradicate the bottlenecks which hamper the application of scientific knowledge and technological support for the betterment of society.
The time has come, ladies and gentlemen, to give a fresh impetus and dignity to science and technology for catering to the needs and aspirations of this important State of the Union of India.
I do hope that the young minds present here will return to their laboratories and class rooms re-energized to do good work in science and to do it for public good.
Jai Hind.
The subject of India’s Muslim minority, and its socio-economic condition, has been the subject of considerable study in recent years.
The debate has thus progressed from informed and less informed speculation to diligent collection and analysis of actual conditions based on ground data.
They are 13.4 percent of India’s population; at the same time, they are the second or third largest Muslim community in our world of nation-states.
They have lived in India’s religiously plural society for over a thousand years, at times as rulers, at others as subjects and now as citizens.
They are not homogenous in racial or linguistic terms and bear the impact of local cultural surroundings, in manners and customs, in varying degrees.
Ad hoc government initiatives taken occasionally were poorly implemented.
The Sachar Report has become a landmark and is being used by the Government for affirmative action in different areas.
The extent to which it has succeeded is the subject of a lively debate.
Amongst the many studies undertaken, I could mention the volume edited in 2010 by Rakesh Basant and Abusaleh Shariff and the Report published last year by Harsh Mander’s Centre for Equity Studies.
Both shed much light on the conceptual and practical limitations of the extant policies.
The volume before us today adds some useful empirical data to the debate.
It is yet another example of the thoroughness and diligence of the CNRS, Paris and of its guiding light, Professor Jaffrelot, who needs no introduction to an Indian audience.
It is a sociological study of the condition of Muslim communities specifically in a dozen urban centres.
This conclusion may be contested on two grounds.
Secondly, and as the editors point out, the Muslims of India are not a homogenous entity.
Different strata of the community have performed differently.
The elite of a feudal past have lost ground but some amongst them have adapted themselves well in new callings.
I am happy to be here today, in the historic city of Lucknow, to participate in this function to mark the International Literacy Day 2012, organized by the National Literacy Mission Authority.
It is an important event in our calendar, an occasion for rejoicing for the work done, as also for introspection about the distance still to be traversed.
Needless to say, literacy is a human right, a tool of personal empowerment and a means of social and economic development.
It is one of the most important parameters for gauging, in conjunction with other social parameters, the development of a society.
Allow me to mention a disturbing fact.
We have the largest number of non-literates in the world.
Our literacy rate of 74 percent, achieved in the last decade, is much below the world average of 84 per cent and is in sharp contrast to what has been achieved by some Asian countries like China, Iran, Myanmar and Sri Lanka.
It is also evident that the vast treasures of knowledge dispensed by our sages and scholars down the ages emanated from a very narrow base in numerical terms.
The paradox is that within our own country, uneven progress in the promotion of literacy has been made and wide disparities are noticeable.
Thus Kerala has almost 100 percent literacy.
Himachal Pradesh and Mizoram have made remarkable progress.
On the other hand, some other states record well below the national average.
When this is viewed in conjunction with other social indicators like infant mortality and life expectancy, the linkage between literacy and quality of life become evident.
The Constitution (Eighty sixth) Amendment of 2002 and the Right to Education Act of 2009 address the problem at the base of the age pyramid.
Three years ago, on this day, the Saakshar Bharat, the new variant of National Literacy Mission, was launched by the Government.
The prime focus of the Mission is to establish a fully literate society through improved quality and standard of Adult Education and Literacy.
The purpose of the Mission is to impart functional literacy to 70 million adults in the age group of 15 years and above focusing mainly on women, SCs, STs, Minorities and other disadvantaged groups of the society in rural areas.
The Programme is being implemented in the Mission Mode with institutional framework at national, state, district, block and Gram Panchayat levels.
The institution of Adult Education Centre at the Gram Panchayat level is the backbone of the Programme.
The rationale of this emphasis is evident.
Schedule Castes, Schedule Tribes and Minorities together constitute 44 per cent of our population.
The socio-economic development of women largely depends upon their literacy level.
Literacy of women thus plays a critical role in their empowerment.
The Saakshar Bharat programme, therefore, gives special emphasis on women literacy.
This has reduced the gender gap from 21 to 16 percent.
I am happy to learn that the Saakshar Bharat programme is being implemented in 372 out of 410 eligible districts spread across 25 States and one Union Territory.
Adult Education Centres have been set up in one lakh Gram Panchayats and around 570 lakh non literates have been identified through door to door survey.
Literacy classes have started functioning in 16 lakh Centres covering around 174 lakh learners.
Out of these, around 144 lakh learners have been certified as literates in the assessment tests conducted by the National Institute of Open Schooling.
Furthermore, development of Adult Education in India depends upon the adaptability of the literacy mission to the emerging changes in all segments of the economy.
Instead of functioning as a transient agent, the mission needs to take shape of a regular and permanent mechanism.
Such mechanism is to be established and continued not only at the level of various administrative authorities, but also at the levels of the civil society organizations, social partners, private sector, community and adult learners’ and educators’ organizations.
The success of the programme would also largely depend upon how effectively it is implemented by the Local Self-Government bodies and Panchayati Raj Institutions.
Finally, we need to create more public awareness and public opinion in favour of our battle against illiteracy.
It is the duty of society to change the conditions in which illiteracy prospers.
Let us not forget that literacy today, with a focus on quality, is essential for social, economic and cultural development of our people and towards the creation of a knowledge society.
I urge every citizen to take up this challenge and contribute to free India from the clutches of illiteracy.
Thank you.
This is a timely initiative.
These choices are made in space and time, in circumstances that vary, and in time spans that may or may not be adequate.
It is also conditioned by a belief in some quarters that humans have a reservoir of aggressive energy.
These “givens” about human nature and human societies need to be questioned.
A group of behavioural scientists who met in Seville in Spain in 1986 concluded that there is no scientific basis for the belief that humans are naturally aggressive and warlike.
They and many others are of the view that external stimulation, rather than spontaneous internal impulses, leads to aggressive behaviour.
Despite this, the history of human societies does tell us that war is endemic; also that periods of perpetual peace have been few and far in between.
These words of Gandhiji became the foundational principle of India’s policy.
Humankind watches  in frozen fear, hoping  against hope that it will not strike.
Its great virtue was that it was realistic, time-bound, and non-discriminatory.
He was the first world statesman to lay before the international community a detailed and workable plan for the elimination of nuclear weapons.
II The global debate in the past three decades has been characterised by both sophistication and sophistry.
Much lip service has been paid to the need for nuclear disarmament.
Public protest movements in the United States and several European countries emerged but failed to make a lasting impact.
In its submission before the Court, India had contended that “the threat or use of nuclear weapons in any circumstance, whether as a means or method of warfare or otherwise, is illegal or unlawful under international law”.
In October 2006 India presented a Working Paper in the UN focused on building confidence in the international community for universal, non-discriminatory and verifiable nuclear disarmament.
Some other developments are worthy of note.
In April 2009 in Prague US President Barak Obama outlined his vision of a world without nuclear weapons.
Initiatives have also emanated from the UN Secretary General and the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
III It has now become abundantly clear that the debate has progressed; also that its thrust has to move from whether to how.
Given this background, I am glad the Indian Council of World Affairs has chosen to celebrate the 68th birth anniversary of Shri Rajiv Gandhi in this befitting manner.
Indeed, now that India has become a State with Nuclear Weapons, its credibility to raise the issue of Global Nuclear Disarmament is even higher.
Ironically, at this juncture that is more favourable than the since the onset of the Cold war to working towards meaningful disarmament, the permanent Conference on Disarmament in Geneva is deadlocked over the question of a Fissile Materials Cut-Off Treaty.
Therefore, the Report of the Group has recommended that: The Report is admittedly idealistic in its hopes and ambitions – but not impractical.
From this arises the need to build public opinion in favour of a major thrust by India in this direction.
A word of caution here would be in order.
The distinction between nuclear weapons and nuclear energy for peaceful purposes must never be lost.
The former is destructive while the latter opens doors to innumerable benefits for the good of mankind.
There is an easy public acceptance of the need to keep nuclear weapons for India’s protection, but   almost no awareness in the public mind of the specific  consequences of a nuclear conflict.
It is for you to imbibe the message, propagate it, enhance support for it and thereby lend a hand in the quest for a safer future.
This objective goes beyond governmental policies and may even require some calibrated coaxing.
It is, after all, a matter of moral and practical necessity and leaves no room for wavering or tentativeness.
I thank the Indian Council for World Affairs for giving me the opportunity of sharing my thoughts with this audience.
I wish them all success in their endeavour.
Jai Hind!
It is also an opportunity to pay homage to a great son of India, and at a personal level, to my cousin.
Brig Usman won the hearts and minds of one and all during the partition, when he was vested with the responsibility of 50,000 Hindus and Sikh refugees as the Garrison Commander of Multan.
He always remained calm, religiously followed Gandhian principles and delighted in spinning the Charkha, a gift from Bapuji.
He wore khadi when not in uniform and enjoyed reading Gandhiji’s works.
Brig Usman’s determination and commitment was legendary.
When Jhangar fell on 27 December 1947, he took a vow not to sleep on a cot till he had recaptured Jhangar.
Prior to that he was instrumental in defending Naushera.
The heroic deeds of Brig Mohd Usman will continue to inspire the Indian Army in the years to come.
As a war hero, his name in the history of India and in annals of military history will always be written in gold.
His academic credentials are impressive.
It is difficult to speak about some one who personified life itself and lent vibrancy to whatever he touched.
He cultivated refinement without extravagance and knowledge without gasconading.
Above all, he was humane and compassionate.
Abid saheb possessed and displayed a remarkable capacity to prioritize.
When he presented credentials in Washington, President Ronald Reagan asked him to explain the intricacies of our problems with Pakistan.
Refusing to take the bait, he replied that in the limited time available, he would instead talk about trade and technology!
He represented the best of Hyderabad’s old cosmopolitan culture, with all its refinements and fine touches.
He perhaps also subscribed to some version of perennial philosophy, regarding each religious tradition as sharing a single, universal truth.
Instead, and on the same theme, he would have recited another couplet: Justujoo hai zindagi, zauq-e-talab hai zindagi Zindagi ka raaz lekin doori-e-manzil main hai.
Such a man was our departed friend.
Kya khoob aadmi tha, khuda magfirat kare.
Their outstanding contribution for the cause of eradication of leprosy and their humanitarian service to alleviate the sufferings of the leprosy affected persons has found recognition today.
Over many decades they have worked in the field and in anti leprosy centres, taking care of thousands of patients even as they carried on with significant research and study of leprosy.
Their efforts have made a lasting difference in the lives of many leprosy affected persons and have facilitated their rehabilitation and resettlement in society.
On behalf of the International Gandhi Award Committee, and on my own behalf, I extend my congratulations to the awardees and urge them to continue their good work.
They are indeed role models to the society and the nation.
As a disease, leprosy has affected humans for over 2000 years.
Social stigma associated with Leprosy had imputed moral and social overtones to a medical condition leading to ostracism.
Mahatma Gandhi understood the social dimension of leprosy.
He worked to end the social stigma associated with the disease and sought to bring about the reintegration of leprosy patients in the mainstream of society.
By the end of 2005, India had achieved the goal of eliminating leprosy as a public health problem at the national level.
Still, it is important to remember that we have not eradicated the disease.
Two states and one Union Territory have a prevalence rate of over 1 per ten thousand population and are yet to achieve elimination.
It is important that the national effort to eliminate the disease continues and is more geographically focused on these areas.
We still face daunting challenges in the post-elimination era of leprosy.
India still accounts for over half of new cases of leprosy recorded worldwide.
It is estimated that there are over a million leprosy patients with disabilities in the country.
We need to further reduce the leprosy burden, provide quality leprosy services, enhance disability management and reduce stigma and discrimination through increased advocacy and targeted information campaigns.
JAI HIND.
The functioning of our Parliament, based on universal suffrage, is a testament to our brand of democratic politics.
It was unimaginable, in scale and reach, at the inception of the Republic.
Perfection eludes human creations.
Nevertheless, our Parliament has been successful in good measure in representing and harmonising the diversity of our social and political interests, and in moving forward on the basis of commonality and inclusion, rather than superiority and exclusion.
New imperatives propel us.
Sixty years is a good time to assess the working of Parliament in two critical areas of its functioning: ensuring accountability and oversight of the executive, and deliberation and law making.
Both tend to exhibit declining efficacy.
The institutional mechanisms and procedural norms for ensuring accountability are being progressively underused.
Deliberation is less frequent; legislation is at times hasty.
An impression is afoot in some quarters that diligent parliamentary work is less rewarding in political terms.
Despite it, excellent work is being done in some in parliamentary committees.
Public awareness of this, through appropriate means, is essential in this age of instant information.
Our citizens know, must know, that Parliament is central to economic reform and development as these hinge on bringing about new laws, amending old ones and harmonising differences.
Earlier today, both Houses of Parliament have resolved to reinvigorate their working.
These supplement the resolves and resolutions of yesteryears.
It is all the more necessary to restore such salience to the Parliament as we negotiate a difficult economic and social evolution in an era of globalisation, international economic churning and an unstable external strategic environment.
I once again extend my greetings and best wishes to all on this historic occasion.
JAI HIND.
The Foreword by Dr. Karan Singh and the Introduction by Dr. Kasturirangan speak of various interpretations and esoteric connotations of the Vedic literature and of their modern scientific underpinnings.
I have neither the Vedic erudition of Dr. Karan Singh nor the scientific background of Dr. Kasturirangan.
I wish to give a lay man’s view of the significance of the Prithvi Sukta.
The Prithvi Sukta, which is part of the Atharva Veda is in the tradition of hymns to the forces of nature contained in a chronologically much earlier work, the Rig Veda.
The Bhoo Suktam in the Rig Veda is the earliest hymn and aims at the unification of Yajna, which is the effort of all of to propitiate the Gods.
Friends Understanding the treasures of planet earth and means to exploit and utilise them in a sustainable manner has been central to human civilization.
Our earth system with its complex inter-linkages between the atmosphere, the hydrosphere, the biosphere and the ecosphere provides us with water and land resources, ecological, water and energy resources.
It indeed contains essential principles of life, environmental sustainability, and peaceful coexistence in a multicultural milieu.
It gives me great pleasure to participate in this function, organised by Rampur Raza Library, to release the three volumes of the Persian version of the Valmiki Ramayan penned by Sumer Chand in the year 1715 and translated into Hindi and edited by Prof. Shah Abdus Salam and Dr. Waqarul Hasan Siddiqui.
The Raza Library is a treasure house of inestimable value for the literary and cultural history of our country.
Its collection of manuscripts of the medieval period is truly unique.
The Balmiki Ramayan is in Persian Nasta’liq script and like other manuscripts of that period, is beautifully illustrated.
This audience knows that Ramayan is accepted as the Adi Kavya and Maharishi Valmiki as Adi Kavi.
It is closest to representing Indian culture, vision, values and importance of moral values in public and private lives.
Every social and linguistic group in India has adopted and made Ramayan its own.
It has travelled beyond the shores of India and influenced societies and civilizations afar in contexts that are distinct and different from the cultural and religious milieu of India.
The centrality of the personality of Ram, in the cultural consciousness of India and Indians, is amply demonstrated in the poet Mohammad Iqbal’s poem entitled ‘Ram’.
This was published in February this year under the auspices of the National Archives of India.
Both of these, and innumerable other texts, are reflective of a catholicity of approach to good governance in a multi-religious society.
Tolerance and accommodation, rather than bigotry, was widely practiced.
This is of great contemporary relevance.
It constitutes a building block and a cardinal principle of our state policy whereby a plural society has given to itself a secular polity and a democratic state structure.
Practical experience has shown that this Indian model is superior to multicultural odysseys undertaken in many other modern societies.
I congratulate Rampur Raza Library for publishing this manuscript and its Hindi translation.
I congratulate the translators for their efforts and hope that the Rampur Raza Library will continue to uphold its glorious intellectual tradition and undertake more such endeavours in the future.
This is a rare privilege.
Today, I have the good fortune to participate in the closing ceremony of the joint commemoration.
Tagore was a man ahead of his time.
He was one of the most creative exponents of an Asian sense in the early twentieth century.
He expressed himself in an invocation penned in April 1919.
Give me the supreme faith of love, this is my prayer, the faith of life in death, of the victory in defeat, of the power hidden in the frailness of beauty, of the dignity of pain that accepts hurt, but disdains to return it.
I take this opportunity to compliment the National Committee for Commemoration headed by the Prime Minister and the National Implementation Committee headed by Shri Pranab Mukherjee, as also the Ministry of Culture, for the activities and projects undertaken during the past year.
We are also fully appreciative of the efforts of the Government of Bangladesh for its initiatives to honour and perpetuate the memory and legacy of Rabindranath Tagore.
JAI HIND
It gives me great pleasure to participate in the Golden Jubilee Celebrations of the Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana.
During its fifty years of existence, the Bar Council has discharged with distinction and excellence its mandate under provisions of the Advocate Act 1961.
Law as religious prescription and philosophical discourse has a long and distinguished history in India starting from the Vedic age.
Secular law differed widely from one region to another and from one ruler to the other.
Notable court systems for civil and criminal matters were in existence, for example, under the Mauryans and the Mughals.
The sterling role of the Indian Bar in the independence of the country, in formulating our Constitution and thereafter in providing leadership inputs for steering the fledgling Republic is a matter of record and needs no elaboration.
The overwhelming majority of our founding fathers were lawyers including the Father of the Nation Mahatma Gandhi, our First President Babu Rajendra Prasad, the First Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru and the Chairman of the Drafting Committee of the Constitution Dr. Ambedkar.
The role of lawyers in the initial years of our independence was critical in emphasizing the Rule of Law in the governance of the country.
As intellectuals and civil society activists, advocates were role models in society helping the marginalized and the downtrodden.
Friends A golden jubilee is an appropriate occasion to recall the first principles of the calling of law and for its practitioners to rededicate themselves to these principles.
Advocates, in addition to being professionals, are also officers of the courts.
They play a vital role in the administration of justice and have a huge responsibility towards the society.
This audience is well aware of the dicta of our courts that “Advocacy touches and asserts the primary value of freedom of expression, which is essential to the rule of law and liberty of citizens”.
The Supreme Court has held that a social duty is cast upon the legal profession to show the people beacon light by their conduct and actions.
The poor, uneducated and exploited mass of the people need a helping hand from the legal profession.
Any violation of the principles of professional ethics by an advocate is unfortunate and unacceptable.
Ignoring even a minor violation/misconduct militates against the fundamental foundation of the public justice system”.
I believe the legal profession can, indeed must, reclaim the hallowed ground that it occupied during our freedom struggle and in the early years of the fledgling republic.
The need for introspection is imperative; it should lead to an ethical renewal in actual practice.
It is essential for the legal profession today to help expedite the dispensation of justice.
I thank Pawan Kumar Bansal ji and Shri Lekh Raj Sharma for inviting me to this function and wish the Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana every success in the decades ahead in fulfilling its mandate.
A sociologist has argued, rightly, that popular culture is a site where “collective social understandings are created”.
The annual National Film Awards are an important landmark in our cultural calendar and are eagerly awaited.
Over the years, these awards have recognized excellence as also propelled new or unknown talent to national and international limelight and provide encouragement and recognition to them.
They also provide us an annual opportunity to salute and pay homage to the Father of Indian Cinema, Dhundiraj Govind Phalke.
The Dada Saheb Phalke Award winners constitute the legends of Indian cinema.
This prestigious award today is being presented to renowned Bengali film and theatre actor Shri Soumitra Chatterjee.
His partnership with Satyajit Ray would indeed be counted as a memorable director-actor combination in the history of cinema.
I warmly congratulate Shri Chatterjee and all other award winners.
I also wish to thank and congratulate the distinguished Jury for the Awards for their hard work.
This year the two films adjudged as Best Feature Films are in regional languages and are an achievement for regional film industry.
It is an under-appreciated fact that over 80 per cent of the films certified for public exhibition are regional films.
I am also happy to note that this year there has been the highest number of films entered in both the feature and non-feature sections.
The eleven children who have been awarded the Best Child Artist awards deserve our whole hearted appreciation and applause.
As a collective, the films and artistes who have been awarded today prove that contrary to popular perception, Indian cinema is neither formulaic nor conforming to stereotypes.
It has successfully adapted traditional Indian narrative and oral traditions to the requirements of technology and formats of new media.
Friends India is in the throes of rapid transformation.
This is also reflected in the nature and expectations of cinema goers.
We have a growing middle class, and a younger generation of viewers; both are desirous and capable of spending on entertainment.
The film viewers today, besides entertainment, seek to understand their society and their world, and to make sense of societal and personal evolution.
The technology and format of film viewing is also changing with new gadgets including phones, Tablets, Pay-per-view and laptops and venues such as multiplexes.
This is leading to an increasing demand for better cinematography, improved quality and digital formats.
They impact on the distribution and marketing and thus on revenue generation possibilities.
Globalisation has also permeated the film industry.
The movement of professionals across national boundaries is much easier than in an earlier era.
Today, talent seamlessly shifts between continents in search of newer audiences and better returns.
It is noteworthy that foreign governments and tourist organizations are assiduously marketing locations in their countries to Indian film makers.
A stopover in Mumbai and a visit to film studios is a now a regular feature of many visiting foreign dignitaries!
It is evident our films are one of the most potent elements of our soft power.
They are ambassadors of our culture, tradition and society.
I would like to make one more point before I conclude.
In the last few years, it has become possible to release a film in multiple languages simultaneously to cater to different linguistic audiences due to improved dubbing and sub-titling.
This has been commercially exploited since 1994 for releasing foreign feature films in Hindi and regional languages in our country, and 128 such films were certified in 2011.
Yet, strangely enough, we have not enhanced the share of Indian feature films that are dubbed from one Indian language to another.
On the contrary, their number has declined in the past decade from 213 films in 2001 to 147 films in 2011.
The need of the hour is to ensure that we create, through dubbing and sub-titling, a national market for films produced in all regional languages.
To a limited extent, this is happening in the case of television programmes in contiguous linguistic areas.
This will also help revive the regional film industry.
I once again thank the Hon’ble Minister of Information and Broadcasting for inviting me to this function and congratulate all the award winners.
I am confident that this recognition would spur you to greater heights of excellence.
Poets, writers and visitors have for long dwelt on the virtues of Kolkata.
It was in 1862 that the High Court was established in Calcutta as the first High Court in post-1857 British India.
The British presence in the city, of course, predated that momentous happening; it also had its own skewed patterns of behaviour.
These aberrations were done away with by the establishment of the High Court.
It was a seminal event.
Since then, the High Court has performed its functions with dignity and independence.
A great many of them contributed to the Freedom Struggle.
It will be recalled that our First President, Dr. Rajendra Prasad started his career as a practicing advocate in this Court.
II Today, I would like to discuss a fundamental concept that has been one of the core principles enunciated by this Court, and later on, by the Constitution of this country.
I refer to the concept of human dignity.
Human dignity expresses a particular understanding of the inner nature and worth of the human person and his or her proper relations with society.
Human dignity is closely linked with the concept of justice.
In our own Constitution, the Preamble speaks of the resolve of the people of India to promote among all citizens “fraternity, assuring the dignity of the individual and unity and integrity of the nation”.
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar remarked in the Constituent Assembly that fraternity means a “sense of common brotherhood of all Indians – of Indians being one people”.
Our founding fathers had envisaged fraternity to preserve and promote individual dignity.
Every citizen was expected to develop mutual respect towards the other and in the process endow each citizen with enhanced dignity and opportunity for improving the quality of life.
The provisions of fundamental rights were guaranteed in the Constitution and Directive Principles were enshrined therein to orient the policies of the State so that every citizen could seek opportunities for growth and betterment.
Indeed, Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru often talked about individual worth and dignity.
Our courts have developed jurisprudence regarding dignity.
Our Judiciary has made the dignity of the individual, secured by fundamental rights and guided by directive principles, a part of the basic structure of the Constitution.
This approach is shared by others who care for social justice.
The pendency in the High Courts and Subordinate Courts as of 31 December 2010 was around 3.2 crore cases, of which around 85 lakh cases are over five years old.
The reasons for delays in justice delivery are well known.
The Supreme Court recently bemoaned the frequent adjournments for the flimsiest of reasons in the case Shiv Cotex vs Tirgun Auto.
The deterrent impact of an effective law of torts is rarely felt and has been to the detriment of the citizen.
Barring fundamental rights whose violation can be challenged through a writ petition, legal rights, especially civil legal rights bear the brunt of judicial delays.
Let us all remember the citizens, especially the poor and disadvantaged among them, now and always as we go about our daily work.
I once again convey my congratulations on the occasion of the sesqui-centenary of the Calcutta High Court, to the Judges and the Bar, and to the people of the State.
I am confident that we all can look forward to many more decades of sterling service of the High Court.
I thank Chief Justice J. N. Patel for inviting me to this function and wish you all success in the celebrations and your future endeavours.
Jai Hind.
To come to one of the most ancient seats of governance in the country is to share in a fleeting moment some of its illustrious history.
It gives me great pleasure to participate in the centenary celebrations of the Bihar Legislative Council.
I convey my heartiest congratulations to the present and former members of the Council and to the government and people of Bihar.
The Bihar Legislative Council has a noteworthy past.
It is intricately connected to the movement for the formation of the State of Bihar during the early days of our freedom struggle.
It was on 25th August 1911 that a recommendation was made by the Government of India for formation of the Council under the Indian Councils Act 1861 and Government of India Act 1909 (as amended in 1912).
The first sitting of the Council was convened on 20th January 1913 at Bankipore.
After Independence, the Bihar Legislative Council was summoned on 16th February, 1950 and has continued its glorious democratic tradition ever since.
It was the Council’s initiative that resulted in women getting voting rights, in the provision of educational facilities to children of Patna, and the opening of Tibbi and Ayurvedic dispensaries.
I propose to use this opportunity to ponder over the importance of bicameralism and the significance of the Second Chamber in Parliamentary democracies, especially where State structures are decentralized or regionalized.
Bicameralism has a long history and is in vogue in many lands.
John Adams, one of the founding fathers of the American constitution, wrote in 1776 that since the legislative power was sovereign, it required the balance of constituent interests within its institutional structure.
In our country, and during the drafting of the Constitution, somewhat divergent perceptions were voiced.
The Government of India Act 1935 had provided for a unicameral state legislature for all Provinces except for the six Provinces of Madras, Bombay, Bengal, United Provinces, Bihar and Assam.
The Provincial Constitution Committee in its meetings in June, 1947 decided that as a general rule all State Legislatures should be unicameral, and that Second Chambers may be constituted in States where special circumstances existed.
Today, the legislatures of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh are bicameral.
The people of these States have found the Second Chamber useful and have retained it.
To comprehend the context, we need to dwell more closely on the twin concepts of political representation and democratic space.
Electoral record for the Lok Sabha elections shows that in the past five General Elections the number of winning candidates who secured 50 percent or more of the valid votes polled has varied between 121 and 221; it was 121 in 2009.
This paradox, he adds, plays out differently in different domains of the democratic arena and most commonly takes the form of an encounter between a dynamic political process and an inflexible institutional response.
While legitimacy of representation is one matter, the issue of accountability of representatives is equally pressing.
The ability of citizens to hold their representative to account for failing to act in accordance with their wishes or for lack of adequate responsiveness to them is critical for a functioning democracy.
Legislative Councils are an important optional institution incorporated by our founding fathers to cater to special circumstances of states.
Their utility is in enhancing inclusive and participatory governance and strengthening the pillars of democracy.
The Bihar Legislative Council is standing testimony that the “experimental measure” referred to by Dr. Ambedkar has succeeded in enlarging the circle and widening the participatory ambit of our democracy.
Yet, a word of caution is in order.
Any legislative institution is only as effective as the Executive desires it to be.
This is not conducive to facilitating effective and efficient functioning of our democracy.
We must do everything to increase the number of sittings of our legislative bodies.
I once again convey my congratulations on the Centenary Celebrations of the Bihar Legislative Council and thank the Chairman of the Council and the Hon’ble Chief Minister for inviting me to participate in this function.
I am happy to inaugurate the 11th Annual International Conference organized by the Raijv Gandhi Cancer Institute and Research Centre.
The Centre has emerged as a premier cancer treatment facility not only in India but in the South Asian region.
It has kept pace with rapidly changing scientific and technological advances in cancer diagnostic and treatment.
The subject matter of the Conference this year is important in view of our changing demographic profile and lifestyle transformation occurring in our society.
Cancer rates in India are lower as compared to Western and developed nations.
For example, Prostate Cancer deaths per 100,000 male population are around 29 in Italy, 41 in Latvia, 50 in Norway, 58 in Swedan and 38 in United Kingdom.
However, with increasing migration to urban areas, increased life expectancy, drastic life style changes and environmental degradation, cancer incidence in India is expected to rise.
The real challenge is to control the rates of oral and esophageal cancer which are among the highest in the world.
I am given to understand that use of a 'Prostate Specific Antigen' blood test is controversial in India and is not part of organized screening in India.
It is also said that traditional Indian diets rich in vegetable and that have many unique dietary constituents such as turmeric might be responsible for lower incidence of prostate cancer in India.
Public heath concerns on non-communicable diseases should be given greater prominence by the media and the medical fraternity.
I congratulate the organizing team of this Conference and wish you all success in your deliberations.
Jai Hind
I am happy to be here in your midst today.
The world over, Convocations are an important date in a University’s calendar.
Neither technology nor the changing face of academia has dimmed its luster.
I congratulate the graduating students and the distinguished personalities who have been awarded the Honoris Causa.
Their achievements and contributions are a source of joy and pride to the University and the nation.
In honouring them, we also honour their alma mater and the values that they have nurtured in them.
I also congratulate those students who have been awarded medals and prizes for their academic excellence.
Since time immemorial, education has been an important instrument for social and economic transformation.
The technological revolution and the process of globalization have not only enhanced its salience but transformed it into a precondition for economic growth.
It is the key to enhance our competitiveness in the global economy.
Ensuring equity in access to quality education for all, in particular for the marginalized in our society, is central to the economic and social development of India.
It was in April 2000 that the World Education Forum at Dakar adopted the Dakar Framework for Action.
It recognized that education is a fundamental human right and is the key to sustainable development and peace and stability within and among countries.
The international community committed itself at Dakar to achieving free and compulsory universal primary education of good quality by 2015, and eliminating gender disparities in education.
It specifically decided to improve all aspects of the quality of education so that recognized and measurable learning outcomes are achieved by all, especially in literacy, numeracy and essential life skills.
Quality indeed lies at the heart of the goal of “Education for All”.
What happens in classrooms and other learning environments is vitally important to the future of our citizens.
Education of acceptable quality must address basic learning needs, enrich the lives of learners and their overall experience of living and well being.
I refer to the issue of quality, or the lack of, in our educational system.
Friends We have achieved considerable progress in universalizing elementary education through the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyaan during the course of the past decade.
The passing of the Right to Education Act and its implementation has transformed a human right into a fundamental right for all children to demand 8 years of quality elementary education.
A critical element of the Eleventh Plan strategy in education was to achieve a paradigm shift from access to quality.
This, regrettably, is yet to be achieved.
The structure and quality of these institutions, and their output, was the subject of critical scrutiny in the Yashpal Committee Report of 2009, tasked to suggest measures for the renovation and rejuvenation of higher education.
Furthermore, university education is no longer viewed as a good in itself but as the stepping stone to a higher economic and social orbit.
Thus higher education in our country suffers the pincer effect of low enrollment and poor quality.
Second, there is an urgent need to move away from the lure of branding and elitist education.
The average institution must improve for overall institutional improvement in the human resource development sector.
The enormous resources deployed for education in the last decade in terms of human and material resources must be justified by vastly improved learning outcomes.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that the budget of one central university is almost the same or more than the budget of all state universities in some states.
Fourth, education in our country must be an arena of choice, not of elimination.
Friends The key to improving quality, and indeed the entire edifice of our education system is to bring the focus back on teachers.
We in India believe the Guru to be Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshwara.
We are inheritors of a civilisational legacy that accords the highest place and respect to teachers.
It is a matter of concern that our society and polity today does not accord that primacy and reverence to teachers.
The current system of teacher recruitment, teaching methods, performance assessment, incentive and reward structure and manner of accountability raises many questions.
Far too often the focus, regrettably, is on completing the syllabus rather than on cultivating critical thinking skills and competencies.
This needs to be corrected.
We should also depoliticize education and cease to view teacher appointments as patronage or largesse.
It must be ensured that their work reflects our Constitutional values.
In this venture, universities play a unique and crucial role.
I once again convey my congratulations to those who have been conferred the Honoris Causa and all the graduating students of the University.
I thank the Hon’ble Chancellor and the Vice Chancellor for inviting me to be the Chief Guest at today’s Convocation.
Jai Hind.
It gives me immense pleasure to take part in the Birth Centenary celebrations of the Shri Sachidananda Hiranand Vatsyayan, better known as ‘Agyeya’.
It is a matter of satisfaction that the Prabha Khaitan Foundation, the Sahitya Akademi and the Raza Foundation have taken the initiative in organizing the celebrations in Kolkata.
As a towering literary personality, he initiated new and experimental trends in almost all genres of literary writings including poetry, short stories, criticism, novels, travelogues, essays and drama.
He also ventured into journalism and took up causes of the poor and the oppressed.
He was a patriot and a revolutionary freedom fighter on whom Chandrashekhar Azad left a deep impression.
He was a polyglot, well-versed in Hindi, English, Sanskrit and Persian.
He also had a stint in Indian Army and took part in social movements for the benefit of the downtrodden.
His interest also extended into academia, especially the teaching of Hindi.
To an extent, his pen name is most appropriate to his personality.
Agyeya, ‘the unknowable’, was most in evidence in his poetry.
The poet’s canvas was wide and concerns diverse.
It ranged from the problems of language and how it reflects the altered identity, a focus on silence and the power of utterance to summon meanings, and use of poetry as truth telling.
Ladies and Gentlemen I would like to highlight four issues from the thoughts and the writings of Agyeya that have contemporary literary, political and social significance.
The first of these relates to the intricate relationship between literature and politics.
Indeed, Vedic hymns were used to win battles and the Mahabharata and Ramayana laid down the rules of war and royal conduct.
He believed that poetry on politics was the best use of poetry.
On the other hand, being completely anti-political too was not a solution.
Shri Vatsyayan felt that a poet does not cease to be a citizen or a political person.
Even a denial of involvement in politics constitutes political action.
He asserted that poetry changes society because the poet has been influenced and has changed.
His emphasis was not on politics or poetry but on the changes in the poet-citizen.
While such a standardized and dry language might be useful for spreading literacy, he felt that the logic of literacy can not be the logic of a national language.
Third, Agyeya bemoaned the fact that as our social and political life became complex, it has become very difficult to focus popular ire.
Power and exercise of power has become more diffused.
Friends Birth anniversaries provide us an occasion to pause our routine and flow of habit and introspect on various aspects of our lives and look for meaning.
Birth centenary celebration of a towering literary figure like Agyeya is also an occasion for us to think about the realm of individual possibility, depth of mental capacity and the complexity of linguistic intricacy.
Hindi was not the mother tongue of Agyeya yet it did not prevent him from becoming an exceptional Hindi writer.
His fluency in English and in other languages was more in tune with the leaders of the Indian renaissance that emerged in Bengal.
In fact, Agyeya acknowledged that his mind was ‘disciplined through the medium of English’.
The life and work of Shri Sachidananda Hiranand Vatsyayan is an inspiration to our youth and any effort to popularize it deserves our full appreciation and support.
I wish the deliberations all success and thank the organizers for inviting me to this function.
A meadow of the mind Anniversaries are occasions to celebrate, and there is much to celebrate on a fiftieth anniversary.
A perceptive historian at the turn of the century had sought to gaze into the world of tomorrow.
Here lies its multi-dimensional character, a trait that allows diversity, even eccentricity, to flourish.
These include the spotted owl.
Talks, lectures, discussions, seminars, exhibitions all contribute to the process.
The peripatetic amongst us finds welcome refuge in the Lodi Gardens, only to return and quench the thirst with reviving liquids on offer!
The twentieth century, it has been said, was characterised by mega-myths and mega-deaths.
It saw the end of colonialism and apartheid but not of disparities between and within nations.
Writing in the last decade of the century, a historian said the world risked both explosion and implosion and needed change.
And change did come, in ample measure but accompanied by its own limitations.
On one side, converging technologies and emerging social trends changed the landscape in societies and in their functioning; on the other, the new actuality is yet to mature in thought processes.
Both enhance the scope for non-understanding and misunderstanding.
Both result in fresh perspectives in culture, economics and politics.
The difficulty is that the tools of analysis, and the vocabulary of discourse, is often embedded in a past that was qualitatively different.
In a period of nation states, national sovereignty, economic autarky and exclusive cultural identity, the founders of the IIC spoke of peoples of nations.
In the past five decades, however, the import of these concepts stands modulated.
The same holds good for universalisation of political values.
Justice, democracy, human rights, good governance – nationally and globally – are impeccable in themselves but often stand diluted or abandoned for other considerations.
Butros Ghali’s aspiration, “to maintain the integrity of each while finding a balanced design for all,” is yet to be achieved.
Prescription would not work.
The challenge would be to eschew hegemonic or homogenising models and contribute towards the promotion of justice, equity and diversity reflective of the ground reality of the world we live in.
I thank the Trustees and members of the Centre for inviting me today.
I extend my best wishes to all graduating students and wish them all success in their professional and personal endeavours.
This audience is aware that we have in place a comprehensive framework of laws and policies pertaining to mental health.
Subsequently, the catalyzing impact of the Supreme Court intervention resulted in greater resource allocation and enhanced policy intervention to mental health.
Over three fourths of the total expenditure on health constitutes private sector expenditure, of which over 90 per cent is borne out-of-pocket by private households.
A review of the human resources focused on mental health is also revealing.
Ladies and Gentlemen A few questions do come to mind.
Allow me to share them with you: Friends That there exists a huge gap between the demand for mental health service provision and supply is not in doubt.
Improving the infrastructure and human resources for supplying mental health services is one aspect of the problem.
The more serious issue relates to the stigma of mental illness in the country.
We must reduce the stigma and discrimination through public awareness.
These population groups need proactive appraisal of their mental health condition and timely intervention if necessary.
I once again congratulate the graduating students and thank Ghulam Nabi Azad saheb for inviting me to this Convocation.
JAI HIND.
I am happy to be participating in this function to pay tribute to Ramnathji's memory.
Verghese characterised him, come to embody the fight for the fundamental right of freedom of speech and of the press.
As a Gandhian and a freedom fighter, a politician and an industrialist, a citizen and an activist, he remains an exceptional personality of his time.
He was India's Pulitzer.
The Awards instituted in his name to celebrate excellence in journalism, are a fitting tribute to his courage and commitment.
Ladies and Gentlemen The world as we know is experientially shrinking and it has changed the paradigm of production, transmission, and consumption of media products.
It takes on the form and structure of the society where it operates.
It is only an instrumentality and not a panacea.
The hard work of defining and implementing a value system and a vision for an organisation, a society or polity can not be substituted by technology.
Second, convergence between news media, entertainment and telecom has eroded the demarcation between journalism, public relations, advertising and entertainment.
So is the case between business, commerce, philanthropy, politics and profession.
This has significantly enhanced the complexity of our working and personal lives and created new ethical dilemmas that lie at the core of many issues of public debate today.
Third, the public purpose of journalism that guided us in an earlier era has changed.
Gandhi ji was probably the first editor in the history of Indian journalism to have started a newspaper for the express purpose of breaking the law governing the publication of newspapers.
He was also one of the first editors to be prosecuted for sedition.
It was this public purpose of journalism that had propelled Ramnathji into the newspaper business.
Friends In a changed and changing world, it would be useful to remember that vibrant journalism in a democracy is watchdog journalism.
It monitors the exercise of power and influence in society and stands for the rights and freedoms of citizens.
It informs and empowers citizens rather than entertains and titillates them.
Vibrant journalism is based on professional ethics and should be the rule in a democracy, rather than the exception it has come to be.
The media is the fourth estate in a democracy.
It plays a major role in informing the public and thereby shape perceptions and through it the national agenda.
Adherence to accepted norms of journalistic ethics and maintenance of high standards of professional conduct is deemed to be a natural corollary.
Experience shows that the best guarantee for safeguarding the public interest is to have strong and independent-minded editors.
Today, they are an endangered species.
The slow erosion of the institution of the editor in Indian media organisations is a reality.
When media space and media products are treated solely in terms of revenue maximisation strategies, editors end up giving way to marketing departments.
Media norms are an issue of public debate.
Unfortunately, the same cannot be said about our justice delivery system.
The time taken to settle court cases deters individual citizens, and even corporate entities, from seeking legal options.
This makes imperative the search for alternate tools for redressal of grievances.
This is at variance with the practice of other developed democracies.
The impact of the emergence of a handful of media conglomerates spanning the entire media spectrum in moulding public opinion, generating political debate and safeguarding consumer and public interest is a moot question.
The matter assumes urgency in the wake of moves towards consolidation in the media sector.
Ladies and Gentlemen I would like to refer to one other aspect of the profession.
When this occurs, the role of the media as a defender and upholder of public interest does get dented and relegated to the background.
I would also take the opportunity today to seek better development and harnessing of the human capital of journalists.
Just as IT and other industries train their personnel after recruitment, the press must take the lead in training and professionally updating journalists.
Failure on this front by the editors and managers of the media would prompt imposition of professional standards by outsiders, as was recently done by the Supreme Court of India.
Issues of ethics and professionalism of the media appear to invade all aspects of our lives - political, economic and social.
Even a distinguished gathering such as this meant to honour the blessed memory of Ramnath ji and honour excellence in journalism is not immune from allegations centred on ethical issues.
It is for you, the journalist community, to take the initiative and seek to address the various concerns regarding the profession.
I congratulate all the awardees and wish them many more years in the service of their chosen profession and the nation.
I thank the Ramnath Goenka Memorial Foundation and the Indian Express family for inviting me to this function today.
Jai Hind
I am happy to be in your midst on my first visit to Tripura and participate in the 9th Annual Convocation of the University.
Today is a special occasion, as all convocations are.
They also give us an opportunity to recognise the exceptional and the brightest for their achievements and contributions to the public good.
It gives me great pleasure in welcoming in our midst Bangladesh's illustrious daughter, Her Excellency Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina.
As the daughter of the Father of Bangladesh, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, and as Prime Minister, Your Excellency’s tireless efforts in upholding democratic values and women's rights in Bangladesh are recognised and serve as a global benchmark.
Meeting neighbours is always an occasion of happiness and rejoicing.
It also provides occasion to review and renew bonds that bind us and address concerns that distract us.
Ladies and gentlemen The destinies of India and Bangladesh are interlinked.
Our people share in great measure a common history, culture, language and tradition.
They have co-operated and faced challenges together.
Our relationship is rooted in shared values and commitment to secularism, multi-party democracy, social justice and fundamental human freedoms.
The landmark visits of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina to India in January 2010 and of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to Dhaka last September elevated the bilateral relationship to new heights.
Bangladesh abuts our North Eastern region and provides critical linkages to its economy, ecology and environment.
We stand committed to fashioning economic and trade arrangements, not only for ensuring closer integration of the region with the national economy but also with the economies of neighbouring countries in the region.
The commitment was demonstrated when Prime Minister Manmohan Singh was accompanied by Chief Ministers of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram during his visit to Bangladesh in September 2011.
This underscores the great interest and enthusiasm of the States of Northeast India in furthering their engagement with Bangladesh.
Tripura shares a special relationship with Bangladesh.
Having borders with it on three sides, the state and its people had played important roles in the path leading to the birth of Bangladesh.
Friends As we enter a new year, let us recall that last year was special for our countries as it marked two important milestones in our bilateral relationship.
First, Bangladesh celebrated its 40th anniversary of freedom and formation.
Let us all work together for the one supreme cause that animated Tagore, the union of all sections of humanity in sympathy and understanding, in truth and love.
I take this opportunity to congratulate Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina on whom the University has conferred the degree of Doctor of Literature honoris causa.
I also felicitate the students graduating today and wish them all success in their lives and chosen professions.
I thank H.E the Governor and the Vice Chancellor for inviting me to this Convocation.
JAI HIND
I am happy to be here today in your midst to inaugurate your new campus.
I commend your initiative to establish centres of excellence in specialised areas such as private and public international law, foreign policy and security studies, environmental law and climate change.
Equally impressive is your effort to assist professionals, the judiciary and the government in reducing the backlog of cases.
A similar view was espoused by the Working Group on Legal Education of the National Knowledge Commission.
Thus the role and public function of law schools has vastly changed since independence.
This is reflected in the preferences of the graduating students.
Today there is a pendency of over 56,000 cases in the Supreme Court, of which around 36,000 are arrears constituting cases which are more than one year old.
The pendency in the High Courts and Subordinate Courts as of 31 December 2010 was around 3.2 crore cases, of which around 85 lakh cases are over five years old.
The Supreme Court recently bemoaned the frequent adjournments for the flimsiest of reasons in the case Shiv Cotex vs Tirgun Auto.
The Hon’ble Judges said: “It is sad, but true, that the litigants seek – and the courts grant – adjournments at the drop of the hat.
A mission mode approach is proposed to improve the infrastructure of Subordinate Courts under the National Mission.
It is usually the individual citizen and the poor and marginalised among them, who bear the brunt of inadequate or non-existent Alternate Dispute Resolution mechanisms and extended judicial processes.
The deterrent impact of an effective law of torts is rarely felt and has been to the detriment of the citizen.
Barring fundamental rights whose violation can be challenged through a writ petition, legal rights, especially civil legal rights bear the brunt of judicial delays.
There is one other aspect of the matter.
I am confident that the Gujarat National Law University would lead in imbibing a culture of community and public service among its graduates and adopt a leadership role in emphasising professional excellence and ethical conduct.
I thank the Chief Minister and the Director of the University for inviting me to today’s function and wish you all every success in your future endeavours.
It gives me a great pleasure to participate in today's function to release this excellent book on the sea faring tradition of Gujarat.
This edited volume is as much about history as it is about archaeology, hydrography, the technology of the times, geography and sociology.
Shri Hasmukh Shah, the Chairman of the Darshak Itihas Nidhi deserves appreciation as does Dr. Lotika Vardharajan, the editor of the volume, for their initiative and effort.
Indeed, the international seminar held in October 2010 has opened up new horizons, linkages and given unique perspective to the complex mosaic of Indian society.
Any study of Indian history cannot be separated from the context of the three large water bodies that surround the Indian sub-continent.
India was the lynchpin of the sea-based trade and commerce for at least four millennia.
The world's first tidal dock is believed to have been built at Lothal around 2300 BC during the Harappan civilisation, on the Gujarat coast.
The influence of the sea on Indian Kingdoms, their prosperity and civilizational ascent continued to grow with the passage of time.
The volume and nature of trade conducted with diverse areas over centuries could not have taken place without appropriate navigational skills.
The trade was as much directed to the West as to the East of India.
With trade came politics, cultural and human interaction.
Mutually beneficial trade yielded to more narrow and selfish concerns causing Indian merchants to lose their control over India's maritime commerce.
Yet, coastal commercial communities flourished as they had a great deal of autonomy and opportunity and had not been constrained by political and economic elites of the hinterland.
Each of our coastal zones - the Gujarat Coast, the Malabar Coast, the Coromandel Coast and the Bengal Coast - had their commercial sectors of specialization, their commercial interlocutors and geographies of affinity.
Their trade was as much directed inwards, towards regional, coastal and riverine trade, as it was to long-distance oceanic trade.
Friends This book is a treasure trove of interesting facts and facets of a bygone era.
These include the role of earthquakes in changing the course of rivers and causing civilizational decline, and the accuracy of ancient wind charts and maps.
Equally puzzling was the destruction of expensive Blue and White Chinese porcelain of the Yuan dynasty, reportedly during the time of Firuzshah Tughlaq.
The book also covers the textile traditions of Gujarat and the impact it has had in West Asia, Europe and South East Asia.
This attempt should be seen as a pilot study that should be replicated for all other regions in the country to better understand ourselves, our history, our tradition and culture and our politics and economy.
I once again convey my appreciation for this initiative and thank Shri Hasmukh Shah for inviting me to this function.
I am happy to be participating in today’s function to inaugurate the 64th Annual Conference of The Association of Otolaryngologists of India.
This is a distinguished gathering of professionals and specialists gathered from all over India and abroad.
Your speciality deals not only with diseases of ear, nose and throat, but also tumors of head and neck.
It is an important specialty because it deals with important sensory organs of the body and organs dealing with the modes of communication.
They are not only critical for survival but deal with important areas intimately associated with our identity and sense of self, such as the nose.
It would appear that in our country, there are two significant public health problem areas related to your specialty.
One is deafness and the other is cancer.
Deafness affects 6-7 per cent of the Indian population and is a major problem.
These figures point to the magnitude of the challenge facing the country, and especially the concerned specialists and professionals.
I believe that our ENT surgeons can do a lot not only to treat it but to prevent it.
We also must make concerted efforts to increase the numbers of ENT specialists and Otolaryngologists to tackle this problem effectively.
Noise pollution is the other menace contributing to hearing loss.
Today we not only have to deal with environmental noise due to traffic or industry, but also recreational noise ever present in the form of loud music etc.
It is time ENT specialists and Otolaryngologists emulate the National Programme for Prevention of Blindness and initiate a National Programme for Prevention and Control of Deafness which was started as a pilot project five years ago in some parts of the country.
Friends Cancer related to ear, nose and throat that constitutes about 40 per cent of body cancer also needs urgent attention of the nation.
I understand that this disease has a much higher incidence in our country as compared to the West, probably related to life style causes.
It can kill in so many ways that it is a risk factor for six of the eight leading causes of death in the world.
It is an irony that the vast majority of those deaths occur in the developing world where rapidly growing economies offer people the hope of a better life.
Tobacco is the single most preventable cause of death in the world today and a major cause of cancer.
We can, and should, prevent illness and death resulting from tobacco use.
I thank the organisers for inviting me to this programme and wish you all success in your deliberations.
The awards, instituted in the memory of C H Mohammed Koya, former Chief Minister of Kerala, are a fitting tribute to his memory.
He believed in using the media to bring about social awareness and change and his role in advancing the educational infrastructure in Kerala as education Minister is well known.
The efforts of the C H Mohammed Koya Trust and the Calicut Press Club in instituting and maintaining these awards, that recognize outstanding contribution to journalism, are laudable.
I congratulate all the awardees for their hard-work and dedication to the highest traditions of journalism.
I am referring, of course, to Mahatma Gandhi.
Later, 'Young India' and 'Harijan' became powerful vehicles of his views on all subjects.
He wrote on all subjects.
He wrote simply and clearly but forcefully.
The fourth estate has an important role to play in a democracy.
A healthy, vibrant democracy not only creates the space for a free media, but rather it needs an impartial and independent media for its survival.
The essential roles that a free and responsible media is expected to play in a democratic society include;   We need a responsible press to hold power to account.
The media also has a transmutative power.
It not only portrays reality but can alter the perception of reality itself.
In a letter addressed to George Washington in 1792, Thomas Jefferson said, “No government ought to be without censors, and where the press is free, no one ever will.
Nature has given to man no other means of sifting out the truth whether in religion, law or politics.
It is a pillar of democracy, the rule of law and good governance and contributes to more inclusive and sustainable development, and, in empowering citizens of our country.
Today, more than ever, the media must stand up to fear, seek information and speak out.
It must not hesitate to tell the powers their errors in commission and omission.
It is a fundamental function of the media and a basic requirement for the functioning of a healthy democracy.
Today’s award winners prove that this can be done.
Jai Hind.
A memorial lecture, by established custom, is instituted to recall the good deeds of those who are no longer with us.
Our distinguished speaker today has chosen happiness as the theme of the Fourth Hiren Mukherjee Memorial Lecture.
Nor was Lord Buddha alone in considering happiness as an essential ingredient of virtue.
I hasten to invite His Excellency the Prime Minster of Bhutan to address the audience.
The Challenge of Change  Convocations are occasions to honour intellectual achievement and celebrate life in academia.
I congratulate the graduating students and the distinguished personalities who have been awarded the Honoris Causa.
Their achievements are a source of joy and pride to the University and the nation.
Today’s universities are no ivory towers where knowledge is pursued only for its own sake.
It is accepted that teaching and research in a university, and the advances in knowledge it produces, should in considerable measure also related to the demands of change and transition in our society, polity and economy.
This duality of academic purpose, with a sharper focus on the imperatives of change, stands emphasized.
Those familiar with the history of philosophy would know of a group of thinkers known as Stoics.
Amongst them Marcus Aurelius, a Roman Emperor of the first century A.D. who, following the Greek philosopher Heraclitus, dwelt on the concept of change.
And yet, there is ambiguity about the meaning of change.
Questions about its causes, nature, dimensions and desirability do arise.
Many a time, the nature of change is a part of the process of change itself.
A vivid instance of change of global dimensions was witnessed in the closing decade of the 20th century.
We witnessed it, firstly, in the dramatic shift in the international system emanated from the winding down of the politico-military conflict between the superpowers and their respective blocs.
The concept of power changed, and highlighted the new role of hard and soft power.
Globalisation has led to the emergence of aspiration, comparison, competition and dissatisfaction as drivers of change.
People today have comparative yardsticks to assess their situation, the performance of their governments and societies, and to see what alternatives exist, or can be fashioned.
They demand that they be given choices and chances in their social, economic and political lives so that they can actively determine their destinies.
The information and communications revolution and the proliferation of social media has led to the flow and control of information becoming unpredictable and non-linear, flowing in many directions at the same time.
As a result, change today is increasingly more disruptive, more difficult to manage, more complicated to harness for achieving desirable political and social outcomes.
It is, nevertheless, far reaching.
II Such are the dimensions and implications of change at the macro-level.
When we move beyond observing changes, we exercise choices to secure desirable outcomes from processes of change.
These outcomes bring about transitions.
Fear of the unknown is a psychological reality and, as Bertrand Russell once said, to conquer fear is the beginning of wisdom.
The impetus for change and transition presents us with an opportunity and a threat.
It interrupts our lives in unpredictable ways and disrupts our patterns of work and thought.
It affects social relations and equations.
Yet, it also gives us an opportunity to review what is right and wrong with our current modes of working and thinking.
It allows us to introspect, and choose differently to better our lives.
It leads to improved and informed decision making.
Ladies and Gentlemen  Issues of change and transition are central to understanding the social and political processes in any country.
It establishes a sense of urgency for change and thus reduces the threshold of resistance.
It is far easier to push through systemic changes after major economic or political crises.
Second, the temperament of a people, both at the individual and community levels, determines how they view and engage with the world.
These processes influence individual and group attitudes.
By the same token, experiences of being marginalized, deprived or disempowered could seriously impact levels of tolerance, acceptance, and optimism and discourage trust and erode hope.
It is more likely to breed cynicism, criticism, pessimism, and even abuse.
Third, our values, belief systems and life experiences determine attitudes to change and taking of risks.
Some groups are inherently more risk taking and adapt to changes in the socio-economic environment at a faster rate than others.
This is not limited to social groups but also extends to professional groupings.
Our past learning curve and adaptation experiences to change also provide us with tools, skills and acquired wisdom to tackle change and transition in our lives.
Nations and communities that are inclusive, heterogeneous, outward looking and have a high tolerance for difference and dissidence are better in managing and implementing sustainable change.
III  The foregoing is not all a theoretical discussion of change and transition.
They have practical and immediate implications for students graduating today and for those still in the portals of academia.
The young citizens of this Republic are indeed seen as change agents by the State and our society.
You are privileged to be born in an era that abounds in new hopes and possibilities, extraordinary opportunities and means to realize them.
This scale of change within the span of two decades is unprecedented in our history.
As a consequence, our yardsticks of what constitutes success, the aspirational goals of our society, have also substantially changed.
Some of these relate to pecuniary success and status attainment.
At the same time, you are also bound by the laws of the land and the values of our nation and society in terms of legally and socially acceptable means of achieving these goals.
Where symbols of achievement across classes remain unchanged but are coupled with limited opportunity for segments of the population to achieve them, social anomie or cultural chaos prevails with the disappearance of predictability or regularity of behaviour.
A product is easier to adopt than a process.
Thus, technological change is easier to adopt and absorb than social or societal change.
This is evident in our society and needs to be attended to diligently.
As youth, you have the option of setting your own goals without being pressured.
You could choose to either conform or go against the flow of your peers.
Yet remember Gandhiji’s dictum that the means matter as much as the ends.
Achieving goals at any cost will impose unacceptable costs on you, your family, your community and the nation in the long run.
I wish the graduating students all success in their future academic and professional endeavours.
I congratulate the distinguished personalities who have been awarded the Honoris Causa today.
I also thank Prof. Sobti and his team for inviting me to the Convocation.
Jai Hind.
The pitfalls for the uninitiated are evident.
That phase is now over.
Sociology is today seen as a vital tool in understanding societies and the ongoing social changes.
The sociologist, in a word, has become indispensable to the process of governance and management.
Friends The world has been transformed in the past two decades.
This period has witnessed significant advancement in scientific and technical knowledge and achievement of gross prosperity unparalleled in human history.
This prosperity co-exists with unprecedented inequalities.
The Greek historian Plutarch had observed that “an imbalance between rich and poor is the oldest and most fatal ailment of all republics”.
Real incomes of the top percentile across developed and emerging countries have grown disproportionately higher, exacerbating income inequalities.
This is not merely an economic phenomenon, related to income distribution and disparity of wealth.
Social inequality is a reality, with differences in status, opportunity and power, and the absence of an overarching framework of social justice.
It has its own impact on levels of human development.
It is known that social disparities are not always congruent with economic inequality and that difference in power and status can chart through non-economic realms.
Social and occupational stratification work as much to constrain opportunities and life chances of individuals as economic factors.
Inequality is a problem in the long run, especially when it kills aspiration for personal and societal betterment.
II In our own country, the matrix of inequality spans gender, the rural-urban divide, class, caste, tribe, linguistic and cultural groups.
While growth is a necessary condition for societal welfare, it is not sufficient and does not automatically lead to equality in accessing development and opportunities for growth.
Our founding fathers focused on this reality and brought to bear a unique and insightful sociological bearing into the framing of the Constitution of our Republic.
III The second issue that I would like to deal with is the increasing salience of urban sociology.
As a matter of fact, Delhi and Mumbai are two of the world’s four cities with population of over 20 million.
The 21st Century would indeed be an Urban Century.
Urbanisation and urban migration has transformed social space and social time, and left its imprint on the spatialisation of social order.
It is an arena demanding sociological study of the pulls and pressures of individual citizenship and community living in cities, dichotomy of gated communities and sprawling slums, of conflicts centred on domicile and migration, culture and language, religion and profession.
While our cities propel economic growth, prompt economic and social change, and spark widespread innovation and entrepreneurship, our urban spaces and governance mechanisms have also become the theatres for political conflicts and economic struggles.
Urbanisation has also led to unique forms of identity assertion and political mobilization amidst competing claims.
These emerge from diverse social, political and linguistic groups seeking to appropriate urban spaces and opportunities for social and economic advancement.
How society manages and addresses these claims is critical to keeping our urban spaces inclusive, and preventing the metropolitan cities from becoming exclusionary and exclusivist.
We do need a public debate to ensure that our urban spaces remain ‘national’ in their character, that there is transparency and inclusiveness in urban governance and so that our cities do not succumb to narrow or sectarian monopolies.
It is here that urban sociology can help us understand the latent social and political stimuli and tectonic movements before pent-up subterranean social pressures erupt in an earthquake!
The Sociologist has in such instances also taken the mantle of mediating between the citizen and the State, and as a result empowering the former and bestowing greater legitimacy to the latter.
Though this phenomenon is welcome, it has its critics who feel that Public Sociology delegitimizes the discipline and could politicize, corporatize or even dumb-down the subject.
It is also the correct response especially when the common citizen feels disempowered and dehumanized while facing the relentless onslaught of technology, globalization and the might of the market and the State.
I hope that the Post-Conference seminar in Kerala later this month would debate this aspect in some detail.
I thank this distinguished gathering for a patient hearing.
I once again congratulate the Society on the occasion of its Diamond Jubilee and thank Prof. Oommen for inviting me to this function.
A non-historian in a houseful of those who worship at the Temple of Mnemosyne is an oddity.
History, it is said, does not solve problems but does help understand them better.
Its direct lessons are few, its specific morals rare.
“The historian and the facts of history”, he wrote, “are necessary to one another.
The historian without facts is rootless and futile; the facts without their historian are dead and meaningless.” Since history records human activity, its ambit is vast, almost synonymous with life itself.
The historian per force is compelled to make a choice of the domain of scrutiny – political, military, economic, social and cultural, intellectual, scientific and technological.
Each domain is a record of change and of happenings leading to change.
The challenge for the historian is to assess the nature of change and its impact on the actors on the stage of history.
The tools of assessment and the intellectual skill of the assessor, perhaps even predilection, thus become critical.
As Lord Acton put it, “the main thing to learn is not the art of accumulating material, but the sublimer art of investigating it, of discerning truth from falsehood and certainty from doubt.
It is by the solidity of criticism more than the plenitude of erudition that the study of history strengthens, and straightens, and extends the mind.” A particularly difficult area of work is contemporary history.
Here the domains of the political analyst and the historian converge.
II History has societal relevance and plays a role in the shaping of identity.
Since humans are social creatures and sustain themselves in social groupings, every individual per force has multiple identities – individual, family, group, national and international.
Each is also a conglomerate of sub-identities, be it language, faith, food habits, economic activity, social or political affiliation, cultural and artistic pursuits.
Identity is therefore always plural and efforts to compress it into a singularity are at best simplistic and misleading.
Ours is an ancient land that has witnessed the vicissitudes of ages.
We are also a modern republic whose contours and parameters were carefully defined in the Preamble of the Constitution.
These encapsulate essential ingredients of modernity.
Jawaharlal Nehru understood them to mean democracy, religious tolerance, economic development and cultural pluralism.
And yet, there are contradictions that hamper the realisation of objectives.
It has of necessity to be liberal and accommodative.
The understanding has also to be inculcated that a proper perception of the past requires a serious examination of the values of that time.
A history teacher once said that the pleasure of history teaching comes from alienating the familiar and familiarising the alien.
Both require going beyond the stereotype.
I venture to hope that there are some in this learned audience who would subscribe to this approach.
III I would like to draw attention to one other matter.
The last phase of this interaction, of British domination, has for good reasons been the subject of intensive historical scrutiny.
One consequence, perhaps unintended, of this has been the neglect of the history of immediate and proximate neighbours.
The period of British supremacy, rooted in the complex economic mechanism of modern colonialism, disrupted centuries old patterns of economic and cultural relationships.
Modern India has, with considerable success, sought to revive these contacts in the political, commercial and cultural fields.
The same however cannot be said of endeavours in the realm of intellectual activity, particularly history.
One looks in vain for good Indian historical studies pertaining to the immediate or proximate neighbourhood to the north, east or west of India.
A principal casualty of this is our inability to discern their thought processes and perceptions directly and rely instead on transmission through other sources.
Yet academic studies are few and most do no justice to the subject.
The situation is probably the same for Central and South East Asian countries and is reflective of a wider problem.
A random perusal of the Indian Historical Review and of the research projects of the Indian Council for Historical Research makes it evident.
This, apart from its academic relevance, impacts on our understanding of neighbouring societies most relevant to us.
Perhaps it is time to inject a corrective and induce scholars to explore these areas.
I thank Prof. Jaspal Singh and the Indian History Congress for inviting me to the Platinum Jubilee Session and wish you all success in your deliberations.
JAI HIND.
It gives me great pleasure to inaugurate the National Press Day.
I congratulate The Press Council of India, its Chairman and Members, on this occasion.
Friends Ours is an age of great change - social, economic, political and above all technological.
Each has impacted on our individual and collective thought processes.
The answers are often disconcerting, in many cases tentative.
The theme of today’s celebration is Media as an instrument of public accountability.
A useful starting point of discussion would be to enquire into the basic premise of being a democracy.
An essential feature of democracy is constraint on unlimited exercise of power.
Democratic practice seeks to bring about accountability of actions of institutions and individuals in an objective, verifiable and transparent manner.
Another truism is that some form of media has been integral to human civilization since time immemorial.
Its principal purpose, to inform, remains unchanged.
Technological innovations like the invention of paper and the printing press, radio transmission, TV broadcasting, and the World Wide Web have spawned new media platforms and devices for consumption.
The new trends in technological development and media conglomeration characterized by an emphasis on commercial values and outcomes, pose challenges to traditional public service values in news broadcasting.
It plays a major role in informing the public and thereby shape perceptions and through it the national agenda.
Media outlets today assume importance not only for marketing and advertisement but also for the ‘soft power’ aspects of businesses, organisations and even nations.
It is a harsh reality that media entrepreneurship is now a necessary condition for a business enterprise, a political party and even individuals seeking to leverage public influence for private gain.
Ladies and Gentlemen It would be instructive to study how other democratic systems have dealt with the media revolution and the convergence of communication technologies.
Three stable democracies, namely the United Kingdom, the United States and Australia can be studied for best practices.
In December 2000 the United Kingdom published a White Paper entitled A New Future for Communications in Britain.
It suggested conceptual restructuring to bring together the five sectors of telecommunications, television, radio, broadcasting standards and radio spectrum allocations under a single-umbrella communications regulator.
In addition, it proposed covering access, choice, content and competition.
Emanating from this, The Communications Act 2003 established the Office of Communications (OFCOM) as the regulator for all communications industries to further the interests of citizens and consumers.
The experience of the United States and its Federal Communication Commission in regulating communications by Radio, Television, Wire, Satellite and Cable for over 75 years is also instructive.
It promotes competition, innovation and investment in communications, encourages the best use of spectrum and revises media regulations so that new technologies can flourish alongside diversity and localism.
In the case of Australia, it is The Australian Communications and Media Authority which is responsible for the regulation of broadcasting, the internet, radio communications and telecommunications sectors.
It seeks to bring about programme diversity, help foster a national cultural identity, bring about fair reporting of news and ensure respect for community standards.
In the absence of any other government regulator, the focus has shifted to self-regulation by the media organisations, individually or collectively.
Individual self-regulation has also failed due to personal predilection and the prevailing of personal interest over public interest.
Two questions arise here.
The ongoing national debate on the subject should involve all stakeholders leading perhaps to the publication of a White Paper.
It has been debated extensively in the Press Council and other fora, including Parliament.
It is a matter of some satisfaction that the ‘culture of silence’ on the subject is being replaced with an attempt to grapple with this malaise at multiple levels.
Finally, I venture to hope that your debate would also focus on the erosion of the institution of the editor in our media organisations.
When media space is treated as real estate or as airline seats for purpose of revenue maximisation, and when media products are sold as jeans or soaps for marketing purposes, editors end up giving way to marketing departments.
I thank the Press Council and Justice Katju for inviting me to the National Press Day Celebration.
I wish you all success in your deliberations.
Few would know of his passion for animal welfare or his early career in politics as a member of the Legislative Assembly.
It was indeed fortuitous that Justice Iyer came back to the Bar.
The guarantees given to us by our founding fathers through the Constitution were reinterpreted for a new age, and new instruments fashioned to deliver justice.
His activism continued after retirement with renewed vigour, and is visible to this day.
Justice Krishna Iyer can justifiably lay claim to be a Karma Yogi all his life.
The past two decades have accentuated the trend.
The success of our polity is to be measured by the dexterity with which we have negotiated the rapids of this transformation.
The advances in terms of scientific and technological knowledge and applications far outstrip the combined achievement of humanity to date.
We have produced ever more, consumed ever more, and wasted ever more than in history.
Yet, we also know that these are aggregates, and averages always hide the condition of those below the average.
It is now globally recognized that human development is adversely affected under conditions of inequality, and that this can be quantified across indicators of health, education and income.
Friends The Human Development Report 2011 of the UNDP published last week has demonstrated that around a quarter of the human development at the global level is lost due to inequality.
The South Asian region suffers the second largest human development losses due to inequality, after Sub Saharan Africa.
In the case of India, there is an overall human development loss of over 28 per cent due to inequality.
The loss due to inequality of human development achievements in education are the highest in the case of India and amount to over 40 per cent.
Inequality is a problem in the long run, especially when it kills aspiration for personal and societal betterment.
In India, the matrix of inequality spans gender, the rural-urban divide, class, caste, tribe, linguistic and cultural groups.
While growth is a necessary condition for societal welfare, it is not sufficient and does not automatically lead to equality in accessing development and opportunities for growth.
Indeed, securing to all citizens equality of status and opportunity is a solemn resolve that finds mention in the Preamble of our Constitution.
The State has a constitutional and moral duty to expand opportunities for those being left behind.
The inauguration of the hostels and the Library Complex is another milestone in the efforts of the Foundation to promote higher education, research and excellence.
The Holy Quran begins with an injunction “Iqra - Read”.
Acquisition of knowledge and its dissemination were always held to be very important for the public good, individual emancipation and amelioration of the community.
The economic and social reality of today has only accentuated the centrality of knowledge.
As India moves towards actualizing its vision of a knowledge society, it is clear that those who are not educated will be left behind.
The human development indicators of Muslims have been well documented by the Sachar Committee Report.
The Government remains committed to implement the recommendations of the Report, with a specific focus on addressing the problem of educational backwardness of the Muslim community through a multi-pronged strategy.
Yet, the Government remains one of the many stakeholders in addressing this problem.
The value of modern education was recognized by all communities in the state even before independence.
The Foundation’s efforts have achieved significant success in the last decade.
I hope it would continue its good work and encourage many more students towards academic excellence and pursuit of research in science, technology and the social sciences.
I congratulate the trustees of the foundation for their hard work and urge them to continue on this path for the benefit of the community, the state and the nation.
I once again thank Dr. Mohamed Ali for inviting me and wish the Foundation all success in its efforts.
I am happy to participate in this conference, claimed to be the first of its kind, of scholars and practitioners of international relations from all over the country.
This initiative of the Ministry of External Affairs deserves our appreciation.
I confess I am somewhat puzzled at the characterization of today’s initiative as being part of ‘public diplomacy’.
Words have meanings and concepts have connotations.
The dictionary meaning of diplomacy is ‘management of international relations’.
The interest of the general public in it, as in other aspects of public policy, is evident.
It is evident that bringing together practicing professionals, academics, and interested members of the public, for a healthy exchange of views and ideas is a normal part of the business of government in all aspects of national activity.
There is no reason for it to be different in regard to external relations or be given a different nomenclature.
Friends India lives in a community of nations and is an active participant in it.
A prerequisite for these is a sound knowledge of the world, of the equilibrium of power, of the dynamics of current or anticipated changes, and of the manner they impact on India and Indian interests.
Each is a function of incisive scholarship in which conceptual frameworks and micro-analysis would lend credence to the national effort.
The harsh reality, however, is that the study of international affairs in our country is episodic, emotive and inadequate.
Three aspects of the matter need to be considered.
Record would show that our performance on each of these counts is less than adequate; given our intellectual resources, the output should have been better in terms of quality and content.
The need for correctives is thus evident.
Its rationale is self evident; its success would lie in concrete correctives, not platitudes.
Academics analyse the conduct of international relations and diplomacy.
Diplomats, on their part, put together the building blocks of diplomacy and use them for achieving national objectives in international relations.
Yet, it is vital that they interact and exchange notes.
Friends Our understanding of countries and people that we deal with cannot be based solely on academic output of foreign institutions.
We need to evolve a uniquely Indian understanding, based on the historical context of our relations with other nations and peoples, as also contemporary realities and concerns.
We need our own culture of strategic thought.
A first step towards this end should be acquisition of linguistic skills.
This is one area where there is an acute national shortage of skilled professionals, well versed in the languages and idiom of other countries and peoples.
Another requirement is the sociological analysis of societies, particularly of countries most relevant to us and to ascertain their core concerns, interests, obsessions and inhibitions, and response frequencies.
There is another aspect that deserves closer scrutiny.
Serious academic analysis in the field of international relations is not possible without access to archival records.
We do need to bring our rules on this in line with the practice of other advanced and open societies.
This would lead to better academic research and more productive policy making.
I wish you all success in your deliberations over the next two days and thank the Ministry for inviting me to this Conference.
The Persian saying dair aayed, durust aayed does help console me.
Turkey and India have known each other for centuries.
Both contributed to it in ample measure; both take pride in this heritage.
There are similarities and parallelism in this heritage.
This is most vividly evident in mysticism, the great spiritual current that runs through all religions.
Amongst them were Jalaluddin Rumi in Turkey and Moinuddin Chishti in India.
They were virtual contemporaries; Chishti died in 1236 and Rumi in 1273.
Nor were they alone.
The theme was pervasive in his utterances.
It is this backdrop of a plural society and a tradition of accommodation and synthesis that has allowed modern India and its democratic polity to develop and put into practice a secular polity.
This is a basic feature our Constitution and cannot be amended.
Thus for different reasons, and traversing different paths, modern Turkey and modern India reached the same destination, considered essential for our wellbeing in the modern world.
The purpose of public policy is to develop the capacity to protect and promote these values and interests, and to respond to challenges.
Instead, we face changing alliances and interests, new modes and instruments of conflict, and universalisation of normative standards of fundamental and human rights.
This churning, and shift in world and regional power balances, will continue.
The unprecedented political and social challenges in every region of the world have been further compounded by the precarious global economic situation, described by Professor Jeffery Sachs as “the great failure of globalization”.
Our view of the world stems from our civilisational heritage and experience of history.
Based on these premises, India has also stood steadfast to the basic principle of full sovereignty and independence of peoples, and their states, in an inclusive, representative, and increasingly pluralist world community.
We want to see an inclusive world order, a world united by partnerships based on mutual respect and benefit, not divided into blocs or alliances of competing interests.
We believe that the benefits of globalization must be inclusive, across and within nations.
We remain convinced that dialogue and cooperation are the best way to address the new global challenges.
Institutions of global political and economic governance, including the United Nations and Bretton Woods institutions, should reflect contemporary realities and not perpetuate historical contexts and divides.
The primary objective of Indian policy is to improve the lives of our own people through sustained development.
Ladies and Gentlemen We cannot but notice the pockets of turbulence in our common area.
India and West Asia have enjoyed cultural, intellectual and commercial ties since ancient times.
The turmoil that some countries in West Asia and North Africa have experienced in recent months is a matter of great concern to us.
However, violent means must be abjured by all sides.
As a member of the Security Council since the beginning of this year, India has been underlining the need to resolve conflicts through political negotiations and diplomatic means, rather than through the use of force.
A primary cause of tension, instability and violence in the region is the situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
The conflict is political and cannot be resolved by force.
At the same time, protracted negotiations over decades have not achieved the national goals of the Palestinian people and have fuelled disappointment and anger.
India was the first non-Arab country to recognize the Palestinian State in 1988 and will support its aspirations in the United Nations.
The upheaval in Libya is characterized by a fast changing situation and the Transitional National Council has now acquired effective control.
We believe that the normalization of the situation should be in the hands of the Libyan people themselves - guided by democratic norms, respecting popular aspirations and preserving the sovereignty and integrity of Libya.
India has been in touch with the Transitional National Council in Benghazi and Cairo and has reiterated its willingness to extend all possible assistance to the people of Libya in their political transition, rebuilding and reconstruction activities.
We deplore all violence, irrespective of who the perpetrators are.
The Syrian government has announced some far-reaching measures and it should be given the time and space to implement them.
The international community has a role in assisting the process of transition, but that does not extend to imposition of external prescriptions.
Friends The complex neighbourhood in which India is located has seen rapid and often, turbulent, change in the last thirty years.
India has followed the same policy of dialogue, engagement and mutually beneficial cooperation that it urges on all international issues.
The fratricidal conflict there is a threat to regional and international peace and security.
It is India’s view that the peace process should be Afghan-led, transparent, inclusive, and based on the acceptance of the Afghan Constitution.
Our civilizational links with Afghanistan and our close friendship are embodied in the landmark Strategic Partnership Agreement that we signed during President Karzai’s visit to India last week.
The international community must take effective measures to guarantee the sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Afghanistan.
The Afghan people have suffered enough and must be allowed to decide their destiny without external interference, coercion or intimidation.
India will participate in the forthcoming conferences in Istanbul and Bonn to contribute to regional and international initiatives to support Afghanistan’s efforts at nation building.
We subscribe to the emerging patterns of partnership in Asia based on Asian regionalism, inter-regional dialogue forums with other regions, global and multilateral organizations, and robust bilateral cooperation.
We believe that no partnership architecture should be exclusive or exclusionary.
It should neither be a reflection of the emerging redistribution of global or regional power nor should it be a platform for projection of narrow economic and political interests of a nation or group of nations.
Furthermore, all disputes must be settled peacefully, without resort to violence, or the threat of violence.
The same cooperative approach is evident in our policy towards African countries.
We are convinced that the people of Africa are its most precious resource.
India has taken the lead in empowering them through technology, education and skill development.
We have offered lines of credit worth US $ 5 billion and US $ 700 million in grant assistance for human resource development, transfer of technology and building new institutions.
All this adds up to an ardent policy of international cooperation.
India, like Turkey, is a strong proponent of multilateralism and has been actively involved in the work of the United Nations.
We believe reform and restructuring of the UN is necessary to make it better equipped to respond effectively in an era of transformational change in global affairs.
The call for democratization can not be limited to nations and states, but must also extend to global governance.
A case in point is international terrorism.
It is an immediate threat to all nations and knows no national boundaries.
India has called for the adoption of a Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism to help eradicate this scourge.
The same holds for the safety of sea lanes.
Each requires a cooperative and global approach.
III Friends As we survey this backdrop to our engagement and partnership, we must remember what binds us.
Both our countries are secular democracies wherein the will of our peoples is embodied in the supremacy of our Parliaments.
Turkey and India believe in the need to support and sustain our plural traditions and multi-cultural societies.
Our economies are growing at an impressive rate leading to generation of incomes and employment opportunities to millions of our citizens and improving their standards of living.
Both the countries have faced terrorism and have collaborated at international fora on combating terrorism.
We also have a common stake in the emergence of a cooperative multi-polar world order which recognizes the legitimate aspirations of all countries, big and small.
We do not share physical borders, but we do have a vast common extended neighbourhood – in Central Asia, West Asia and the Persian Gulf.
Our joint efforts can result in a more balanced, inclusive and sustainable development for the benefit of vast sections of humanity.
IV Allow me to conclude.
Perhaps Yunus Emre had anticipated it.
It gives me great pleasure to inaugurate the National launching of Platinum Jubilee Celebrations of Prajapita Brahma Kumaris Ishwariya Vishwa Vidyalaya.
Seventy five years is a long span of time that bears testimony to the values and services of this organization.
It is a matter of great pride for India that the message of spirituality and value-based living imparted by this organization has now become a worldwide movement that has touched the lives of thousands of people from different nations, cultures, creed and races.
It is therefore apt for such an organization to have chosen the theme “One God One World Family” to celebrate its Platinum Jubilee.
There cannot be true and lasting peace and harmony in the world unless there is peace in the minds of people.
Only then will they live in peace with fellow humans and nature.
For United Nations and communities we need to have united natures of human beings.
One World Family, ‘Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam,’ will remain a distant dream unless we cleanse our hearts and change our attitudes.
A spiritual revolution is needed to transform the negative and destructive outlook of human beings into positive feelings and benevolent actions.
Peace is a holistic state of living that encompasses the purity, well-being and progress of everything in the world, including nature and material things.
This can happen only when our thoughts, attitudes, emotions and actions are righteous.
Violence of the subtlest form can destroy peace.
Any thought or feeling that is influenced by vices and weaknesses such as lust, anger, greed, attachment and ego shatters the wellbeing of human society.
True progress comes where purity dwells.
A mind that is free from negative and waste emotions will be able to sustain wellbeing of others.
The precursor of a progressive and happy society is a clean and positive mind.
I hope that the Platinum Jubilee Celebrations will spread the message of compassion and oneness in our country and the world and inspire us to build bridges of unity amongst all cultures and creeds.
I congratulate the Brahma Kumaris on this momentous occasion and wish them success in achieving the noble vision of creating a world of peace and harmony.
Jai Hind
Iran and India in an Era of Globalization I confess I am somewhat perplexed by the scope and complexity of the theme of today’s seminar.
This however is not to deny its relevance.
Globalization is viewed in two distinct ways: in a positive sense to describe a process of integration in the world economy, and in a normative sense to prescribe a strategy of development based on a rapid integration of the world economy.
The phenomenon also has political, social and cultural dimensions.
Equally relevant are other dimensions of globalization.
To the sociologist, it is associated with modernity, to international relations theorist with global governance, and to the scientist with a range of technologies and mediums that have qualitatively transformed human communication and connectivity.
This process goes hand in hand with the erosion of the traditional concepts of the nation-state, national economies and national cultures.
Given its diversity, cultural globalization should be viewed in the plural as cultural globalizations.
They are shaping popular cultures and are not limited by geographical boundaries.
They control communication and have the potential and technology to promote specific views, information and analysis.
These companies have reach across borders.
They have proliferated everywhere, yet are usually not governed by local laws.
The same could be said about music.
It has been said that no art form encapsulates globalization more singularly than music.
It was Jawaharlal Nehru who depicted Iranians and Indians as brothers separated in childhood who rediscovered each other through the memory of a common musical tune.
Being geographically adjacent, they witnessed a seamless stream of movement of people.
These inevitably resulted in movement of beliefs, cultural practices and a multiplicity of shared patterns of living.
It comprehends ideas of different orders.
It embraces in its orbit beliefs, customs, rites, institutions, arts, religions and philosophies belonging to strata of society in different stages of development.
There may be reason to believe, therefore, that the current tide of globalization would not submerge the Indian cultural identity but would add an Indian dimension to a globalizing culture.
The Persian language itself has been a part of the vast Indian linguistic landscape for millennia.
The earlier linguistic affinities persisted in later times and were furthered by the intensity of contacts.
Words of Sanskrit origin have been located in Shahnamah.
Maulana Azad identified Dhul Qarnain, mentioned in the Qur’an, with Cyrus the Great.
Professor Juan Cole has opined that at the peak of the Moghul-Safavid period, there were perhaps seven times more readers of Persian in India than in Iran.
The qand-e-parsi did indeed reach all parts of India and left its mark on many of our languages.
The first newspaper in Persian language anywhere in the world was published in Calcutta in 1823 by Raja Ram Mohun Roy of Brahmo Samaj.
Literature, film and art everywhere reflect the socio-cultural trends of their times.
In the case of Iran societal upheavals did attempt, with limited success, a cultural catharsis.
After an initial period of comparative passivity, Iranians have been stirred into a tremendous artistic and literary activity.
Both face today the onslaught of information and ideas in all their diversity and technological prowess.
In the world of tomorrow, they would need to use the tools of modernity – economic, technological and political - creatively.
They have a largely converging interest in an area of stability and prosperity.
I do hope the participants in this seminar will shed light on these enticing themes.
Jai Hind.
The Shaheed Nanak Singh Foundation has done yeoman service to the cause of preserving and recalling the memory of a brave freedom fighter and an exceptional human being.
Shaheed Nanak Singh was a prominent leader during the independence movement.
He not only agitated for freedom but also worked for maintaining communal harmony in face of the divide and rule policy of the British.
He ardently opposed the partition of India.
His life holds valuable lessons for contemporary India.
The legacy of Shaheed Nanak Singh is part of the legacy of the brave and inspiring men and women who fought to make India free.
The image of the modern Indian nation and the values that shape and continue to inform it today, were cast in the crucible of our struggle for independence from colonial rule.
Much of the gain from the freedom struggle is enshrined in our Constitution and continues to enlighten the political and judicial discourse in India.
The freedom struggle was not only a struggle for independence.
It was an exercise in building a nation.
It was not just a movement to replace a colonial regime and deliver political power to Indians but was aimed at using that power to secure social and economic justice, and dignity, for every Indian.
Our freedom fighters, as they struggled for independence, fought not only to break the shackles of foreign rule but also to remove the social ills and regressive practices then prevalent in our society.
They possessed moral integrity of the highest order; the tallest among them was Mahatma Gandhi, whose singular efforts transformed the struggle from a campaign by the elites into a true mass movement.
Mahatma Gandhi, in employing satyagraha- the non-violent insistence for truth and justice- gave a political tool to the masses seeking to oppose a tyrannical rule.
Satyagraha, as a form of struggle, was based on the active participation of the people and on the sympathy and support of the non-participating millions.
Unlike a violent revolution, which could be waged by a minority of committed cadres and fighters, a non-violent revolution needed the political mobilization of millions and the passive support of the vast majority.
The freedom fighters were driven by a passionate intensity that went beyond ordinary.
The love of the nation, the concern for their fellow-citizens and the desire for a better future drove them on.
They embodied the highest values of our nationhood- valor and bravery, spirit of sacrifice, the desire to uproot injustice of all kind, and to build a nation where the mind was to be without fear and the head held high.
They understood that each shot that hit them would be a nail in the coffin of British Raj in India.
The personal integrity and bravery of freedom fighters inspired millions to rise up to the cause of national freedom.
They faced suffering and pain, knowing that it would inspire millions to their cause.
Innumerable ordinary Indians jumped into the national churning, often making great personal sacrifices at the altar of national freedom.
Yet their efforts are no less important than those of the better known personalities.
Their stories are embedded in our collective consciousness.
Many of our public spaces are named after them.
For years, they have inspired our books, music, theatre and films.
Even today, 70 years after they won us our independence, India’s freedom fighters continue to inspire us.
Their memory fills us with pride, and renews our commitment to making India a better nation.
The most enduring legacy of our freedom struggle is our liberty.
We are, as a people, free to choose our own destiny.
We are our own sovereign.
Yet this freedom is not an abstract.
The legacy also enjoins on us the reason for this freedom.
Our national movement was committed to creating an  egalitarian society  and was opposed to all forms of inequality, discrimination and oppression based on gender and caste.
It allied itself with and often subsumed movements and organizations for the social liberation of women and the lower castes.
The national movement brought millions of women out of their homes into the political arena.
As part of its struggle against caste inequality and oppression, abolition of untouchability became one of its major political priorities.
It was this tradition which is reflected in the Indian Constitution.
One of the lasting legacies of our freedom struggle was the creation of an Indian identity.
They began discovering their unity in the process of their struggle against colonial rule.
They not only acknowledged but also appreciated India’s rich cultural, linguistic, religious, ethnic and regional diversity.
From its early days, the national movement was committed to secularism.
Yet the dark forces of communalism were powerful and led to the partition of India in 1947.
That traumatic event resulted in a wave of communal carnage.
Despite it, the strong secular commitment of the national movement enabled independent India to make secularism a basic pillar of its Constitution, as also of its state and society.
Legacies do endure but no legacy, however strong, can last forever.
Jai Hind.
This is my first visit to the State and I am enchanted by the idyllic surroundings of Shillong.
I also feel privileged to attend today’s convocation at an institution tasked with advancing knowledge and improving social and economic conditions and welfare of the people of the North Eastern region.
It has succeeded in significant measure not only in evolving specialized courses and research programs but also tuning the curriculum to the conditions and needs of the north eastern region.
I take this opportunity to congratulate the graduating students who will be moving out to their chosen careers and courses of higher learning.
Much has been achieved, much remains to be done.
One significant ingredient of the latter, relating to almost half of our population, is gender equality.
I therefore propose to discuss some aspects of it today.
The principle of gender equality, and of affirmative action to ensure it, is writ large in the Constitution and has been reinforced by Supreme Court rulings.
Societal reality however is not in consonance with it.
Socially constructed roles of men and women define a person’s role in society, economy and household.
As a result and in order to camouflage reality, we resort to tokenism and often parade exception as the rule.
Gender works its debilitating impact over lifetimes and generations, and impedes a person’s access to human capital formation, full range of citizenship functions, economic opportunities, social emancipation and political participation.
Five dimensions of inequality and discrimination resulting from gender need to be considered.
These relate to demographics, nourishment and health, literacy, participation in economic activity and political representation.
The first is reflected in cold data.
It is a matter of concern that the sex ratio in the age group 0-6 years continues to decline since 1961 and stands at 914 in Census 2011.
This level is higher than all countries in sub-Saharan Africa except Eritrea.
Likewise, over 55 per cent of adult Indian women, every second woman, suffer from iron deficiency anaemia.
Here too most countries of sub-Saharan Africa do better.
The attendant impact on quality of life, access to opportunities for social and economic advancement, and ability to realize and harness their human potential is evident.
In the third place, our health indicators are weaker as compared to our level of development.
Fourthly, the level of female economic activity is lower and so is female participation in professional and technical work.
The Five Year Strategic Plan of the Ministry of Women and Child Development for 2011-2016 notes that work force participation rate of women in urban areas is a mere 14 percent as compared to 54 percent for men.
Even in rural areas, it is 31 percent for women whereas it is 55 percent for men.
Women’s share of organized sector and public sector is less than 20 percent.
They have an even lesser share of Central Government employment, of less than 8 percent.
Less than 11 percent of the seats in our Parliament are held by women.
The situation is worse in the case of state assemblies.
Thus the picture of discrimination and deprivation that emerges is disturbingly stark.
Better results will be produced by women citizens empowering themselves and being encouraged to do by enlightened segments of public opinion.
An important focus area for policy and action is asset ownership.
There exist huge gender inequalities for key productive assets such as land or residence, ownership of business or vehicles, and even communication tools such as mobile phones.
Even in a metro such as Bangalore, less than a quarter of women had cell phones compared to around half of the men surveyed, whereas only 12 per cent of women owned vehicles as compared to over 50 per cent of men.
The World Development Report 2012 released by the World Bank ten days ago argues that gender equality is a critical determinant of development outcomes and makes for smart economics.
This is an important aspect so that inequity, marginalization, discrimination and stereotyping are not transmitted across generational cycles.
I wish the graduating students all success in their further studies, careers and lives and thank the Chancellor and Vice Chancellor for inviting me to this Convocation.
I am happy to be back in Mumbai and to address this distinguished gathering on the occasion of the Golden Jubilee of the Yusuf Meherally Centre.
Yusuf Meherally played a leading role in peasants' organisations and trade unions.
He was imprisoned many times and was elected the mayor of Bombay in 1942 when in Lahore jail.
He coined the 'Quit India' slogan that Gandhiji adopted in his final campaign for independence.
A Socialist and founder of the Congress Socialist Party, he believed that his socialism was based, as he put it, “on aesthetic and ethical premises and not on economics".
He was moved by human suffering and worked to alleviate it.
His prison dairy of 1942, as also his work as Mayor of Bombay and as a member of the Bombay Legislative Assembly, bear testimony to his commitment to public causes.
Today’s function gives us an opportunity to ponder over the ideas and ideals of Yusuf Meherally, with a focus on those relating to urban governance.
Friends The close interrelationship between urbanization, economic progress and social evolution is insufficiently appreciated.
We trace our historical heritage to the cities of the Indus Valley and the extensive urbanization of that era.
Since then, rapid urbanisation has literally changed the face of the planet.
Within two centuries, the urban population increased from 2 per cent of the world population in 1800 to crossing the critical 50 per cent mark in 2009.
The United Nations estimates that the urban areas of the world are expected to absorb the entire expected population growth of the next 40 years and even draw in some population from rural areas.
Most of this expected urban population growth is likely to occur in cities and towns of Asia and Africa.
Until 1975, there were only three global megacities, with population of over 10 million – New York, Tokyo and Mexico City.
Today, there are 21 megacities with three in India – Delhi at second place after Tokyo, Mumbai at fourth place and Kolkata at eighth place.
As a matter of fact, Delhi and Mumbai are two of the world’s four cities with population of over 20 million.
There should be no doubt that the 21st Century would indeed be an Urban Century, especially an ‘Indian’ Urban Century, with India expected to account for the largest urban population of over one billion in fifty years from now.
Cities would continue to propel economic growth, prompt economic and social change, and spark widespread innovation and entrepreneurship.
Today it is accepted that achieving growth rates of 9-10 per cent in GDP is critically dependent on a vibrant urban sector.
The Eleventh Five-Year Plan argued that as urban sector con¬tributes over 60 per cent of the GDP, it is a positive factor in over¬all development.
It concludes that this would necessitate “a sufficiently long term focus on urban planning in the Twelfth Plan”.
The time is therefore ripe for a national debate on urbanization, and particularly, on urban governance.
Modern urban municipal institutions have a history of over three centuries in India.
It was in 1687 that the Madras Municipal Corporation was formed and thereafter Calcutta and Bombay Municipal Corporations were created.
In early part of the nineteenth century, almost all towns in India had experienced some form of municipal governance.
The 1935 Government of India Act brought local government under the purview of the state governments and specific powers were given.
This was repeated in the Seventh Schedule of our Constitution in Item 5 of State List.
In 1992, a major step towards the decentralization and empowerment of local governments was undertaken through the 74th Amendment.
It recognized local governments as the third tier of governance and stipulated greater responsibility and authority for them, including in planning for economic and social development, and mobilization and utilization of resources.
Local government is the most neglected tier of government with functional and financial decentralization not flowing from the State governments to the cities.
Furthermore, there is lack of decentralization within the City Councils from the city centre to the peripheral wards, and lack of involvement of community groups and civil society stakeholders, women and other marginalized groups in decision-making and implementation.
Second, we need to radically elevate the role and prestige of managers of large urban agglomerations in terms of structural location in governance and in terms of their place in the political and economic scheme of things in the country.
Megacities such as London and New York have empowered Mayors who set the agenda for the development of the city and promote the economic progress and social development prospects in the city.
Contrary to this, our metropolitan city managers do not enjoy appropriate political prestige or economic clout.
The skill sets and remuneration for our municipal personnel need to be adjusted appropriately.
Third, our urban spaces and governance mechanisms have become the theatres for political conflicts and economic struggles.
Our urban spaces have also been used for promoting reforms as well as for contesting such reform measures.
Fourth, the governance structures of our metropolitan cities differ significantly from each other.
We have a distinct model for the National Capital Region.
Other metropolitan cities are state capitals with their own Municipal Corporations.
They experience competing claims emerging from diverse social, political and linguistic groups to appropriate urban spaces and opportunities for social and economic advancement.
How the nation manages and addresses these claims is critical to keeping our urban spaces inclusive and preventing the metropolitan cities from becoming exclusionary and exclusivist.
We do need a public debate to ensure that our urban spaces remain ‘national’ in their character, that there is transparency and inclusiveness in urban governance.
We need to ensure that our cities do not succumb to narrow or sectarian monopolies.
Ladies and Gentlemen Urbanization can not be prevented; it is in our own interest that we manage it better and direct it to serve our national goals and public interest.
Equality of access to urban spaces, to availing of emerging social and economic opportunities, and to participation as equal stakeholders is essential to prevent social strife and economic conflict.
Let all empower the third tier of urban local government in meaningful ways and let our cities not only survive, but thrive.
I once again thank the Yusuf Meherally Centre for inviting me to this function and once again convey my best wishes on the occasion of the Golden Jubilee of the Centre.
It gives me great pleasure to inaugurate the conference on Current Concepts in Arthroplasty at this premier institution of advanced research.
In the coming years, we may, in all probability, be having the maximum number of joint replacements in the world.
These call for better and more innovative solutions, newer materials and designs of prostheses, including resorting to bio-materials and techniques where possible.
Indian doctors, especially those from AIIMS, are among the best in the world as far as delivery of health care and research is concerned.
The dedication and selfless devotion of the doctors working at this institute is unparalleled.
I wish to congratulate the organizers of today’s conference for their efforts.
I thank Prof. Rajesh Malhotra for inviting me to this Conference and wish you all every success.
Ladies and Gentlemen I am happy to be in the historic and beautiful city of Istanbul.
I thank the leadership and people of Turkey for the warmth and hospitality shown to me and my delegation during the visit.
I thank the Confederation of Businessmen and Industrialists of Turkey for hosting me today.
We can together explore ways of furthering our mutual economic and commercial relations and take them into a higher orbit.
As one of the largest institution representing the business community in Turkey, TUSKON has taken the initiative in facilitating outreach between our business and industry.
TUSKON was active in the successful trade and investment delegation that visited India in March 2008 led by the State Minister for Foreign Trade Mr. Kürºad Tüzmen.
Its success is thus evident.
The next step should be the opening of a representative office in India to help consolidate the surging growth rate in bilateral trade and facilitate the realization of our ambitious trade and investment targets.
Ladies and Gentlemen Turkey and India share many basic values and beliefs.
As members of the G 20, Turkey and India are witness to the momentous economic developments sweeping the global stage.
We are witnessing a new and dangerous phase in the global economy that could threaten the global economic recovery that began in 2009.
The IMF warned last month that the downside risks are “severe” and include “a downward spiral of increased uncertainty and risk aversion, dysfunctional financial markets, unsustainable debt dynamics, falling demand and rising unemployment”.
Even with policy interventions, the prognosis is for anaemic recovery in major advanced economies and a cyclical slowdown in emerging economies.
The backdrop to our bilateral economic cooperation is thus one of global uncertainty.
Yet, it has a silver lining.
Turkey has in 2010 experienced a real GDP growth of 8.9 per cent and is expected to grow by 6.6 per cent this year.
India too had real GDP growth of 10.1 per cent last year and is projected to grow at 7.8 per cent this year.
During the past five years, India had aimed at achieving faster and more inclusive growth, and has achieved an average GDP growth of 8.2 percent.
It has also enhanced revenue generation of the government enabling it to launch social sector programmes, aimed at reducing poverty and enabling inclusiveness.
We attach high priority to them.
India has set a growth target of 9 per cent per annum for the five year period 2012-17 in the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
This can not be achieved without doubling the investment in infrastructure during the next five years, from US $ 500 billion over the past five years to about one trillion dollars.
We need more investments in roads and highways, new electricity generation and distribution networks, expanded and modernized railways networks, new and upgraded airport and port facilities.
Such essential elements of infrastructure would provide our industry and agriculture with the connectivity needed for growth in production and trade, and for improving the quality of life of all of our people.
We have also reiterated our commitment to continue the process of economic reforms.
In a multi-pronged manner, we are proceeding with tax reforms, especially the introduction of a Goods and Services Tax, financial sector reforms, legal reforms, and major reforms in education and skill development.
We are also committed to the pursuit of prudent fiscal and monetary policies and controlling inflation.
In recent years, our mutual economic and commercial relations have become a major driving force of our bilateral relationship.
This has been possible only due to the active exchanges and collaboration between our business communities, including that of members of TUSKON.
The trend in the flow of services and investments between our two countries is encouraging.
Today, over hundred Indian companies have registered businesses, investments and operations here, spanning the IT sector, airport infrastructure, automobiles, steel, irrigation and personal care products.
Considering the expertise and experience of the Turkish companies in construction of infrastructure, it has emerged as a leading sector for investments from Turkey into India.
I am confident that our business and industry would further strengthen the bilateral economic partnership.
The prospects have never been brighter for us to intensify our engagement and tap our markets, and those of our regions and third countries to which we are important gateways.
I call upon you to harness the huge untapped potential to increase the volume and enhance the quality of our economic engagement.
Both governments are your partners in this enterprise.
Thank you.
The publication of this book is timely and touches a matter of public interest.
It brings into focus the inseparable bond of two critical requirements for human will: equality and dignity.
Prof. Raj Kumar outlines a comprehensive legal approach to fight corruption.
The book emphasizes transparency in governance and ensuring accountability of the government as the key weapons to empowering citizens to address corruption.
The comparative references in the book are exhaustive and give insight into the various models of combating corruption, especially in the Asian context.
The ‘Post Script’ addresses the contemporary debate regarding the Lokpal, and the author has given his views on some of the contentious issues.
Every society in history has pronounced norms of governance to distinguish between a good and a bad ruler, a happy and an unhappy people.
The only meaningful corrective to bad governance is good and responsive governance.
The Constitution of India prescribes justice, and equality of status and opportunity, to all our people along with the ideals of liberty and fraternity.
It lays down an institutional framework for achieving these objectives.
At the same time, Dr. Ambedkar had administered a note of caution.
Political parties are thus needed for exercise of political power and for conducting governance.
Their credibility and efficacy are critical elements in bringing about stable polities that are essential for socio-economic progress.
They are expected to set examples of democratic practice, influence the nature of political mobilization, alliance formation and societal accommodation.
They can facilitate conflict management.
Ladies and Gentlemen Shortcomings, wherever identified, must be made good.
At the same time, there is a peril to be avoided.
Any thinking towards solutions that delegitimize the constitutional process can do incalculable harm.
The last question, on ethical conduct and public virtue, can only elicit one response.
Negativity of mind and soul cannot but result in diminishing the public spirit needed to deliver public good.
I hope the publication of this book would ignite a public debate on the important subject of corruption and best means to counter it.
I thank Prof. Raj Kumar for inviting me to participate in this function.
It is a privilege to attend a function commemorating the birth centenary of a great son of India.
The journey from Rajamadam village to Rashtrapati Bhavan is an example of dedication, perseverance and concern for public interest.
Ramaswami Venkataraman contributed to the strengthening of the institutions of our republic.
He was a practitioner of virtue in the classical sense, a stickler for propriety and decency, for doing what was right in accordance with his conscience and convictions.
He believed that incumbency of public office necessitated decision making, and that doing right was more important than catering to personal preferences or quest for popularity.
Friends It is a truism that the Indian reality is reflected in contrasting images.
We have witnessed in our own times significant strides in economic growth, technological innovation and social change.
We also see societal and regional inequalities, wide spread poverty and disease, and unrealized aspirations for a better life.
Change has generated hope; the challenge to our political process is to transform this hope into reality.
The key to the twin imperatives of observance of dharma and delivery of justice thus lies in adherence to propriety in public and personal behaviour and practice.
Shri Venkataraman’s life and conduct is a fitting example of such propriety.
He remains a shining example worthy of emulation.
Ladies and gentlemen The question of propriety in politics, of political morality, is a perennial one.
Kautalya dwelt on the perils of flouting the Dharmashastras and the Arthashastra.
While political virtue is important, it can neither be pursued in isolation nor can it be the sole guide for political action.
Political virtue, combined with idealism and activism, can also degenerate into political anarchy, even tyranny.
A classic case is Robespierre’s famous oration on political morality wherein he argued that in revolutionary times the mainspring of popular government is both virtue and terror.
In any structured society and polity therefore, and especially in a republic such as ours, it is paramount that political virtue be wedded to the grammar of constitutional morality.
It involved, as he put it: In other words, freedom with self restraint, recognition of plurality, consensus on constitutional processes, and absence of a claim to singularity in representation, are absolutely necessary.
Instead of focusing on solving socio-political problems through established constitutional processes, the search for solutions is increasingly moving towards quasi-legal, perhaps, extra-legal arenas.
This has longer term implications.
Delegitimizing the political processes is unlikely to solve our problems.
Ladies and Gentlemen We were fortunate that many of the founding fathers of the Republic were not only freedom fighters, but were deeply committed to putting in place institutions, systems and processes.
They had idealism, were endowed with political virtue, and were deeply committed to the constitutional morality of the republic.
Shri Venkataraman was from that political stock and hence imbued his public life with such an approach.
I thank Lakshmi ji for inviting me to this function.
I wish the Birth Centenary Celebrations of Late President Venkataraman all success.
It gives me a great pleasure to participate in today’s presentation ceremony of the National Communal Harmony Award for the years 2009 and 2010.
The conscious promotion of communal harmony by the State among the citizenry is not just a historical legacy.
It is a fundamental necessity to preserve a social reality that existed for centuries before the State came into being.
The Preamble of our Constitution notes that the people of India would secure to all citizens “FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the Nation”.
Such interventions can either be preventive or corrective in nature.
The general focus has remained on corrective steps due to the intense interest in the wake of incidents of communal disharmony.
While this is necessary, it is not sufficient.
We need a pervasive preventive approach to communal disharmony and a conscious programme of fostering communal harmony.
Today’s function is an important link in the efforts of the government in this regard.
As a polity and as a society, we must recognise the efforts of extraordinary individuals and organizations to enhance our collective commitment to fraternity and promotion of basic human rights and values.
The prevalent mood of cynicism towards public service should not eclipse the achievement and efforts of today’s awardees.
I would like to say that the nation salutes you and wishes you all success in your future endeavours.
I thank the Home Minister for inviting me to participate in today’s function and wish the National Foundation for Communal Harmony all success.
I am happy to participate in today’s investiture ceremony of the Sangeet Natak Akademi Fellowships and Awards for the year 2010.
It is a singular honour to be in the midst of such distinguished artists.
I felicitate all the winners of the Sangeet Natak Akademi Awards.
The Sangeet Natak Akademy, as the apex body in the country for undertaking the preservation and promotion of our performing arts, has for almost six decades carried out its mandate with diligence and perseverance.
These awards have thus played an essential role in preserving and carrying forward the multifarious expressions of our splendid cultural identity.
Inaugurating the Sangeet Natak Akademy in January 1953, our first Education Minister Maulana Azad had emphasized the need to cherish and develop our precious heritage of dance, drama and music, not only for our own sake “but also as our contribution to the cultural heritage of mankind”.
This is all the more necessary in an era of great change and, in a very real sense, becomes the duty of every citizen.
Friends Classical and folk performing arts touch the core of our identity.
It is for this reason that we should appreciate the effort of the Sangeet Natak Akademi to encourage talent in music, dance and drama, preserving the arts and propagating it.
We must also ponder how to popularize each of the fields of classical and folk music, dance and drama at the level of the mass media and common people.
Technology has enabled quicker and cheaper dissemination of products of performing arts, including in digital format, among a diverse and dispersed audience.
The form, format and grammar of art itself is sought to be tailored to the medium and the taste of the market.
On the one hand, purists worry about this trend, sticking to tradition and shunning experimentation that dilutes the essence of the art from.
Others cite the necessity to adapt and preserve classical and indigenous art forms in a globalizing world that flattens cultural diversities.
No one has the perfect answer.
Probably, there is no perfect answer.
I take this opportunity to once again congratulate the award winners and those conferred with the fellowships.
It gives me immense pleasure to be visiting Indore and inaugurating the Bhashayi Patrakarita Mahotsav organised by the Indore Press Club to commemorate the 75th Birth Anniversary of distinguished journalist Late Shri Prabhash Joshi.
Joshi ji’s career and life serve as a shining example worthy of emulation by all journalists.
He was not only a distinguished editor but represented the voice of the people.
He used simple language and local idiom to communicate the issues of the masses.
He was a strong votary of ethics and transparency in media.
His approach was summed up in a pithy observation: Sabki khabar le, sabki khabar de.
This aspect is of relevance because the media is the fourth estate in a democracy.
Two other consequences of the change need to be noted: As a result, media outlets assume importance not only for marketing and advertisement but also for the ‘soft power’ aspects of businesses, organisations and even nations.
Furthermore, the trend towards globalisation has empowered individual citizens through increased movement of goods, capital, services and ideas.
Economic liberalisation and spread of digital technologies have aided it.
II I would like to explore today the implications of these changes.
This is true of a nation’s freedom and it applies as much to the Press as to any other group, organisation or individual."
Many states in India have a few media groups dominating both the print and electronic media.
Fourth, no discussion of media regulation can ignore the recent controversy over ‘paid news’.
The last speech of the late Prabhash Joshi ji dwelt on this at some length.
Sixth, no discussion of media regulation can ignore the slow erosion of the institution of the editor in Indian media organisations.
Vibrant journalism always springs from the bedrock of professional ethics.
Our media, and democracy, are fortunate that we have shining examples of journalists who not only embody the ethical dimension, but sadly, also laid down their life for the same.
Allow me to recall in conclusion a remark of the eminent American journalist of yesteryears, Walter Lippmann.
Convocations are occasions to honour intellectual achievement and celebrate life in the academic world.
They mark the graduation of students from a temple of learning to the realities and challenges of life outside it.
In recent years health care in India has been in public focus with particular emphasis on referral hospitals.
In 2014, the government announced that it would set up 10 more institutions like the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) across the country.
Similar announcements are also made by state governments.
When evaluating the overall needs of the country’s health requirements, a balanced approach between the creation of clinical health infrastructure and the demands of public health have to be considered.
Public health has been defined as the science dealing with the determinants and defence of health at the population level, while clinical medicine deals with multiple maladies and their remedies at the level of an individual patient.
Public health takes into account the social, cultural and economic determinants of health to create systems for efficient health services delivery.
It is focused on research, teaching and professional practice to prevent disease and promote health in populations.
The interventions proposed need to be evidence-based, context-specific and resource- sensitive.
The AIIMS trauma centre experience highlights the importance of acknowledging factors beyond the realm of medical treatments in developing a healthy society.
In 2009 the Government took a landmark decision when it decided to introduce the National Health Bill, 2009.
The draft bill provided  for the peoples' right to health and healthcare; the obligations of the governments and private institutions; core principles, norms and standards on rights and obligations; the institutional structure for implementation and monitoring; and the judicial machinery for ensuring health rights for all.
It also included an itemized list of the specific public health obligations of the central and state governments.
The Bill continues to languish after an initial, brief period of enthusiasm.
The question of priorities remains in the realm of debate.
A comprehensive Act that covers the various aspects of health care rights, delivery and related matters is a pressing need.
Our public expenditure on health, particularly public health continues to be low.
I compliment the faculty, staff and administrators of this Institute for their dedication and hard work that has made this Institute a renowned centre of research and learning and congratulate the successful students.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be back in Patna and to participate, today, in this function being held in the memory of Late Shri Satyendra Narayan Sinha.
“Chhote Saheb”, as he was popularly called, was an important political leader of Bihar, a distinguished Parliamentarian, and someone who had the interests of his state and people uppermost in his mind.
During his long public life of over six decades, Sinha ji made significant contributions in streamlining the education system of Bihar, motivated the youth and students to take an active role in politics, and ensured their representation in political affairs.
As many in this audience would know, Sinha sahib was also a strong votary of the rights of states in our constitutional scheme of things.
As a Chief Minister, and as an eminent and long-standing Parliamentarian, he was in a good position to appreciate the delicate balance maintained by our Constitution between the Centre and the States.
This balance is dynamic and evolving.
I therefore propose this afternoon to touch upon a few challenges to our federal polity in a period of great change, nationally and internationally.
The point was succinctly and authoritatively explained by the Chairman of the Drafting Committee of the Constituent Assembly, Dr. B. R. Ambedkar.
Eminent international authorities have characterised it as “a centralised federation” and as sui generis.
Six decades of experience as a Republic is perhaps long enough to assess the functioning of our federal structure that has been the principal instrumentality for accommodating the enormous cultural, linguistic, religious and ethnic diversity of India within the framework of a democratic polity.
Jawaharlal Nehru was, like you, a person of science.
He believed that the world should harness modern scientific research and technological advances to transform the human condition irrespective of national boundaries, narrow affiliations or ideological affinities.
Your advocacy of good governance and financial stabilization is widely appreciated.
Madam Chancellor, under your leadership our relations have achieved a strong momentum towards creating an equitable, inclusive and representative global order in accordance with Jawaharlal Nehru's world vision.
Thank you.
Excellencies and Distinguished Guests Brothers and Sisters of Bangladesh  Visiting a neighbour is always a matter of happiness.
The pleasure is enhanced manifold when the occasion is such a rarity.
We are looking forward to welcoming tomorrow in New Delhi the Hon’ble A.K.
It is well know that Tagore spent the most creative decades of his youth in Bangladesh where he absorbed the beauty of nature.
Madam Prime Minister Your historic state visit to India last year laid the road-map for our bilateral relations.
We have made considerable progress regarding implementation of the far-reaching decisions taken during your visit and remain committed to addressing your developmental priorities, strengthening bilateral relations and enhancing economic engagement.
Today’s joint celebration is a momentous occasion and the first of its kind in the history of our two nations.
Tagore worked for one supreme cause, the union of all sections of humanity in sympathy and understanding, in truth and love.
He expressed himself in an invocation penned in April 1919.
I take this opportunity to compliment the Government of Bangladesh for its initiative to honour and perpetuate the memory and legacy of Rabindranath Tagore.
I am happy to participate in today’s function.
I wish to convey the country’s, and my own, appreciation for the contribution of the Union Public Service Commission to nation building by shaping the constitution and functioning of the higher civil service in the country.
The concept of civil services, as of judiciary and of defence forces, is inextricably linked to this requirement.
It is for this reason that every state in history has utilized the instrumentality of civil services, tailored to its requirements.
These needs have changed with times, with the nature of the state, and with its end purposes.
Some essential traits have nevertheless persisted down the ages.
This need to seek the best available talent, and condition it appropriately for the requirement of society and the state, was practiced at all times in our own history.
Modern India thus inherited an established tradition.
Its imperative necessity was appreciated by the Founding Fathers of our Republic.
The end product was incorporated in Part XIV of the Constitution.
In the past six decades, the Union Public Service Commission has ably discharged its constitutional function in the recruitment of the higher civil services.
The civil services, in turn, have responded in varying measure to their core mandate of dispensing social, economic and political justice.
The framework of the political and bureaucratic Executive has made a significant effort at ameliorating the quality of life of citizens and in doing public good.
It is therefore essential to comprehend the impulses at work.
Together, they pose a set of six challenges: First, government interventions are now viewed by citizens through the prism and framework of rights.
The days of the so-called mai-baap sarkar are over.
Today, and particularly in matters relating to education, health, roads or good governance, the operative expression is right and entitlement.
Increasing levels of literacy and economic success has contributed to this conceptual shift in some measure.
Third, given the unsatisfactory record of dispensation of justice through the court process, the burden of dispensing it has shifted in considerable measure to the government, civil society and the public in general.
Enhanced legal literacy, establishment of regulatory frameworks in various sectors, and reliance on administrative facilitation have enabled citizens to assert their rights without the need for interventions of courts.
The role of civil servants and public service delivery has become critical in this effort.
Fourth, as an economy and as a society, we are in the process of transition from the use of controls and regulations to bring about desired public policies to harnessing of incentives and markets for the same.
The market looms large in all spheres of personal and public life.
It affects our choices of profession, ways of life, modes of living and entertainment, education, health care, and even, ideologies and belief systems.
Fifth, the broad framework of our social and political contract that sustains the legitimacy of the government and its interventions for public and social good is increasingly facing erosion.
This has come about principally on account of the actual and perceived inequities of the growth process, marginalization and impoverishment of segments of citizenry and also perhaps, a balkanization of the mind.
It has wider, perhaps disturbing, implications for our democracy and the rule of law.
Sixth, we have a young generation that is exposed to global standards of living and service, is impatient with the pace of change, and demands equal opportunity in sharing the fruits of development.
This is more pronounced in urban areas, but equally true for rural India.
Their despondency finds reflection in hostility towards elites in polity, business and industry and society; at times, it takes violent forms of protest targeted against the state, its structures and agencies.
These manifestations retard growth, erode democracy and legitimize anarchy.
We do not need to go far to substantiate this.
Sections of society and polity even accept this as a way of life.
As a result, Rule of Law norms are being sidelined or subverted through systemic discrimination and exclusion based on community, gender, class and other limiting and distorting considerations.
Its impact on the quality of governance is all too evident.
This is not a homily; it is part of our constitutional scheme of things and a professional and moral obligation of a civil servant to the nation and to the citizens.
The UPSC, I understand, is already implementing some reforms in the recruitment pattern, especially in the syllabus and examinations.
The need for introspection and correction is compelling; inaction is no longer an option, nor is reticence in the face of evident wrong.
The need is also for a moral imperative that is comprehensive, not selective, and which emanates from and encapsulates constitutional morality.
Ladies and Gentlemen Systemic improvement in governance and service delivery to citizens is an ongoing process and effort of the Union Public Service Commission in this regard deserves our appreciation.
It is time to remember, and remind, that the objective in the final analysis is indeed - “Public Service”.
I thank Prof. Agarwal for inviting me to deliver this Annual Lecture.
I wish members of the Commission success in their work.
I feel privileged to attend today’s convocation function at the premier Rural Management Institute of India.
The graduates of this institute are special as they span the inter-section of management, development, social sciences, the rural sector, the cooperative sector and the corporate sector.
When the institute was established in 1979, it was indeed a pioneer.
It was a period of lower economic growth rates, limited possibilities and lower levels of human development.
Today, we are on the path towards higher growth rates, greater inclusiveness, improved human development indicators and a changed orientation in the role of government to achieve these outcomes.
We have created a new tier of government at the local level through constitutional amendments.
The last two decades have changed the ground rules for our economy in a fundamental manner.
The volume, mix, variety and legal structures employed for undertaking government expenditure have thus undergone a tremendous change.
There has been a gradual evolution of the role of government from direct provision of economic goods and services and tight control of private enterprise, to broad regulation of economic sectors, promotion and facilitation of private enterprise and fair competition.
Government funds are increasingly devolving through urban and rural local bodies, Special Purpose Vehicles, Non-Governmental Organisations and Public Private Partnerships.
It has to be admitted, however, that outcomes are not yet commensurate with outlays and the objective of inclusive growth through inclusive governance still evades us in some measure.
Correctives are thus essential and the role of rural management in all its dimensions becomes fundamental to the process.
The changed landscape of our political economy raises new questions that have particular significance for rural management education.
Convocations are ideal occasions to ponder over such issues.
Friends A good starting point for our discussion is the dairy sector which provided the initial impetus for the establishment of the institution.
Rural management initiatives have been successful in spreading the White Revolution across the country.
The per capita availability of milk has also increased from 112 grams per day in 1968-69 to 263 grams per day in 2009-10.
The successes achieved are considerable and are cause for satisfaction.
The real benefit of milk cooperatives has been to both the farmers and to the national economy.
When compared to other agricultural produce such as vegetables, fruits or even food grain, this represents one of the best ways for promoting inclusive growth.
The farmer gets a good price for the milk and this could even account for upto a quarter of overall income at the farm level.
However, the macro picture is not too encouraging.
Our per capita availability of milk is still lower than the world average of 279.4 grams.
Moreover, 80 per cent of milk produced is still handled in the unorganized sector and only the remaining 20 per cent is equally shared by cooperatives and private dairies.
Rural Managers have an important role in expanding the footprint of the organized sector, modernizing marketing systems, improving access to formal credit mechanisms and working to improve transport, veterinary and dairy infrastructure.
Other elements such as low productivity of animals, breeding programmes, feed and fodder, and research should also be addressed.
Each of you has spent around eight months doing field work which provides the value context for your education.
You connect with the different organisational structures and situations in rural India and it is this experience that enriches your understanding of some of the core problems of our country and our citizens.
Like the civil service, I believe that rural managers must be committed to our constitutional ideals to achieve inclusive development, social justice, equality and the opportunity for the full development of capacities of all our citizens.
Rural management curriculum should keep pace with these changes and rural managers should analyse and watch out for emerging threats and opportunities flowing from these developments.
I think it is critical to emphasize that the principle objective of an educational institution is to provide education and not to become a de facto placement organization.
The nation is proud of IRMA and its alumni and you should always work to uphold this institutional legacy.
It is very appropriate that the theme of this first international convention is the challenges and opportunities of dealing with the twin issues of water security and climate change.
Water is an essential building block of life.
Existence would be unimaginable without it.
Water resources often transcend national boundaries.
Water management systems have traditionally reflected existing socio-economic structures and governance mechanisms.
Prevention of greed, of waste and of conspicuous consumption must remain high on their agenda.
II At the outset, it would be useful to look at some figures regarding our water resources.
India has 2.4 per cent of the world’s area, 16 per cent of the world’s population but only 4 per cent of the total available fresh water.
Our main water resources consist of annual precipitation of around four thousand cubic kilometers and a broad estimate of trans-boundary flows from upper riparian neighbours of around five hundred cubic kilometers.
Out of the total precipitation, annual availability from surface and ground water is estimated at 1869 cubic kilometers.
The twin indicators of water scarcity are per capita availability and storage.
Our population has increased from 361 million in 1951 to 1.21 billion in 2011.
Accordingly, the per capita availability of water for the country as a whole has decreased from 5177 cubic metres per annum in 1951 to 1544 cubic metres per annum in 2011, a drastic reduction of 70 per cent in sixty years.
This meets the definition of a water-stressed condition which is per capita availability of less than 1700 cubic metres.
The situation is even more serious when we look at individual river basins.
Nine out of twenty river basins in the country, with a population of over 200 million, meet the definition of water scarcity of a per capita availability of less than 1000 cubic metres.
We fare no better regarding the other indicator of storage.
According to the 11th Five Year Plan document, per capita water storage in the country is 213 cubic metres, as against over 6000 in Russia, 4700 in Australia, 1100 in China and 1960 in the United States.
It is estimated that by the year 2050, as per existing water use practices, overall demand for water resources would be 1447 cubic kilometers, around 30 per cent higher than assessed utilizable water of 1123 cubic kilometers.
It is evident that only the adoption of better governance practices and enhanced efficiency would reduce this demand.
The annual extraction of groundwater in India at 210 cubic kilometers is the highest in the world.
For example, in a six year period, ground water depletion in Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana and Delhi was 109 cubic kilometers, double the capacity of India’s largest surface water reservoir.
This data makes disturbing reading.
It suggests that analysis and policy regarding irrigation is central to sustainable water management.
III The picture of water security across the country is indeed one of major concern.
Water availability and water quality issues plague the majority of citizens in both rural and urban areas.
The problem of floods has been exacerbated due to degradation of catchment areas and loss of flood plains to urban development and agriculture.
Water conflict has taken new forms with more menacing consequences.
Climate change issues have further complicated the water calculus.
It is likely to alter precipitation received in our territory, the hydrology of catchments in upper riparian neighbouring countries, and the distribution and quality of water resources in the country.
The threats and challenges are significant and immediate.
We have recognized and responded to the threat of water insecurity emanating from climate change.
The National Water Mission has been established under the National Action Plan for Climate Change for ‘conservation of water, minimizing wastage and ensuring its more equitable distribution both across and within States through integrated water resources development and management’.
Management of rain water and evaporation should supplement current strategies of managing rivers and aquifers.
Thus, water balances, water budgeting, water accounting and water audits should be based on the hydraulic cycle and the interaction between rain water, surface water, ground water and evaporation.
Fourth, improving water use efficiency in irrigation is critical for water management.
For each large irrigation system, benchmarking and performance evaluation studies for each water year with complete water budget and efficiency related data should be put in the public domain for transparency and accountability.
Subsidies should encourage irrigation efficiencies through piped and drip irrigation, and constructing storages for irrigation water at the user’s end.
Participatory management of irrigation systems would increase equity and reliability and reduce losses due to over irrigation.
Fifth, we need to launch a coordinated and time bound programme to improve the analytical capabilities of our water resource personnel in the various public and private agencies at the national, state and local government levels.
Like climate change, the idea of water scarcity must seep into consciousness and through it to the institutions and mechanisms of global and national governance and business and industry.
The need to address the complexities of water management in the context of climate change is imperative.
Water shortages affect the most unlikely of industries.
For example, severe water shortages and high water temperatures in 2003 in France led to the shut down or scaling down of production at the 58 nuclear power stations responsible for supplying over 75 per cent of total electricity.
If nations and peoples ration the use of water for industrial purposes or change the pricing for such use, there would be significant changes in the business environment.
Water stress and scarcity would have a significant impact on the prospects of Indian companies operating in various sectors including agriculture and agro-industry, irrigation, mining, pulp and paper, iron and steel, and power generation.
Regulators, investors and citizens alike must demand corporate water disclosure, including plans and policies for water consumption, use and disposal and whether environmental concerns have been addressed.
I thank Dr. Pachauri for inviting me to inaugurate the India Water Forum and wish you all success in your deliberations.
The occasion helps us recall Babuji’s work and his social and political approaches.
In a public life spanning over five decades, he was the Member of the Union Cabinet for over three decades and handled a variety of ministerial responsibilities of the new Republic.
He had faith in the Gandhian vision and in the possibility of bringing about social change through politics.
He was a dedicated parliamentarian who upheld the highest traditions of parliamentary democracy.
He took charge when the nation was facing a drought, and he steered the Ministry through the Green Revolution.
He therefore initiated the provision of credit facilities and inputs for small and marginal farmers and landless labourers.
Second, in his Presidential Address at the 73rd Session of the Indian National Congress in December 1969, he noted that the starting point for economic reform should be “the reorganization of agriculture and our rural economy”.
He outlined the elements of “reorganization of rural life” as “service cooperatives, cooperative farming, better seeds, irrigation, fertilizers, price stability, storage and marketing, animal husbandry, poultry and fishing”.
Third, Babuji was one of the first leaders to focus on improving the yield of millets, pulses and oil seeds.
He promoted watershed development in rainfed areas and asked scientists to undertake research on drought resistant crops.
Fourth, he emphasized food security as an essential element of public policy towards the poor and marginalized sections of our society.
Fifth, he made agricultural research and education a high priority area.
He established new research institutions, streamlined professional advancement and incentives for agricultural scientists, helped establish the Krishi Vigyan Kendras and directed policy to bring about enhanced congruence between traditional knowledge based on experience of farmers and modern research expertise.
Ladies and Gentlemen Babuji’s life is a practical demonstration of single minded pursuit of equal opportunity in social and economic structures.
This struggle for social justice and social inclusion has not ended.
Our significant achievements since independence need to be further consolidated and the collective efforts of the government and the society must reach out to those of our citizens who continue to suffer marginalization and exclusion.
Such efforts must not be curtailed either by stereotyped patterns of thought and action or by attempts to exclude or be exclusive.
Societal questions cannot be frozen in space and time and a mature and democratic polity addresses them rationally.
First, eradication of the practice of manual scavenging has been an area of priority for the Government.
Second, the Report of the National Commission for Religious and Linguistic Minorities has made some recommendations pertaining to persons belonging to Schedule Castes who opt for other faiths.
The issue is in the public domain and needs to be debated in relation to its constitutional, legal, political and social ramifications.
Third, the National Commission to Examine the Sub-categorization of Scheduled Castes in Andhra Pradesh under the Chairpersonship of Justice Usha Mehra has made certain recommendations.
These, too, deserve a public debate.
Friends The life of Babuji, his vision and his actions have inspired many citizens.
Hence the importance to publish his speeches, sayings and other correspondence which can give an insight into his mind and thoughts on important policy and social issues.
I hope that the Babu Jagjivan Ram National Foundation would undertake this task and enable a more systematic study and analysis of Shri Jagjivan Ram’s life and the values that he stood for.
I thank Mukul Wasnik ji for inviting me to deliver this lecture today.
The Challenges to Indian  Diplomacy in the 21st Century This is one of those occasions when pleasure and apprehension come together: happiness at being with members of one’s own tribe, and misgivings about the responsibility assigned.
Ambassador Satish Chandra and his colleagues on the Executive of the AID had something to do with it but, as the saying goes, from the hands of a friend a stone is an apple!
I am required to speak on the challenges to our diplomacy in the twenty first century.
The difficulty I confront is with the audience!
How do I lecture to a group most of whose members know as much about the subject as I do; some, in fact, know much more.
It is summed up in an Iraqi proverb: ‘When you speak, do not fear; when you fear, do not speak’.
Within these constraints, I shall endeavour to be as coherent as possible.
II  Diplomacy is the conduct of relations among political entities aimed at reconciliation and accommodation of viewpoints and interests.
It is both a function and a determinant of international order.
They would also remember the words of another realist, Henry Kissenger, who recommended ‘patient accumulation of partial successes’ as a desirable methodology.
Both dicta have relevance.
Our own experience of over six decades as a player in the international arena would sustain it in good measure.
This necessitates policy that combines ‘firm commitments to our core national values with dynamic adaptation to changes in the international environment’.
The post-independence decades have witnessed political, emotional and market integration in great measure.
Challenges nevertheless remain and in places have become acuter.
A certain ‘Balkanisation of the mind’ has surfaced.
It emanates from regionalism and pursuit of identity politics in the wake of the deepening of the democratic processes; it also arises out of non-inclusive development.
These in turn detract from our ability to perform in a fuller measure on the global stage.
The world today recognises our emerging role.
Our assets are considerable; so are the expectations.
By the year 2050 we would have a population of 1.8 billion, a labour force of one billion, and the second largest economy of the world.
Our defence capabilities would grow proportionately.
These together would position us for being a significant player in the multi-polar international system that is now taking shape.
It is evident that of these, the second and the third fall squarely in the domain of foreign policy and therefore of diplomacy.
A quality deficit in performance, low levels of accountability in governance, and what has been called the ‘malpractice of democracy’, are handicaps that can and must be overcome.
Diplomacy cannot overlook these domestic impulses.
In the first place and in terms of geography, our immediate neighbourhood would be critical for regional stability and cooperation and the accretion of comprehensive national power by India.
Asymmetry is a fact of life in South Asia and the history of conflict and animosity is deep and scarring.
Our emergence as a global player is dependent in some measure on our ability to resolve or manage contentions to ensure a peaceful and secure neighbourhood, with meaningful economic, cultural and political ties.
The second challenge would be the emergence of Asia, as probably the most important locus of global power.
This has been called the Asian Century and the first decade has given ample evidence of the changing nature of global economic and financial flows and emerging geo-political dimensions.
As we move to complete the noodle bowl of FTAs and CEPAs with the region, the next challenging phase would be to realise the vision of an Asian Economic Community with seamless connectivities.
Community building and partnership in Asia through a transparent, inclusive and open process would best lead to an Asian awakening that benefits all constituents of the continent and all stakeholders.
The third challenge would be to create an enabling international environment for unhindered economic development and growth, including through mutually beneficial arrangements concerning raw materials and markets for goods and services.
It should reasonably insulate functioning resource markets from intervention of state actors.
Indian economic diplomacy would also be called upon to manage political risks involved in international trade, business and investments for Indian business; facilitate the movement of Indian human resources across business and sovereign jurisdictions; and attract foreign investments, technology and expertise to the country.
The fourth challenge is to foster a rule based international order underpinned by strong and functioning multilateral institutions.
Security, economic development, stability and public welfare would increasingly be indivisible in a globalising world.
The institutional architecture of global governance, however, is still an anomaly reflecting post-World War II and Cold War perceptions.
Indian diplomacy is actively involved in initiating the process of making the international order reflective of contemporary realities through reforms in the United Nations system and the Bretton Woods institutions.
The fifth challenge is to evolve a consensual approach, along with all major and minor powers, of dealing with the regimes regulating global commons.
We would need to articulate our role in fashioning, maintaining and implementing these regimes in accordance with our national interests.
A sixth challenge is the requirement to respond in real time to unanticipated happenings, political, economic or environmental and to have at hand the intellectual and organisational resources to do so adequately.
Representation is central to the process of diplomacy.
As this process gathers momentum, our Foreign Office and diplomats would need to deal with two distinct stakeholders: The first problem of representation is the need for the external competencies of different government departments to be well integrated with our bilateral and multilateral diplomatic structures and mechanisms.
This is particularly true of Ministries of Defence, Finance, Home, Commerce and Industry, Petroleum, Coal, Mines, Agriculture, Water Resources, Human Resource Development, Atomic Energy and Space.
States that are in border areas have a natural cultural and economic interest in our foreign policy orientation towards our neighbours.
Furthermore, changes in the international situation are impelling state governments to seek some form of diplomatic representation.
Thus, for example, state governments would be called upon to devise and implement the bulk of the adaptation and mitigation strategies under Climate Change related Environmental Agreements.
Likewise, FTA and CEPA agreements entered into with other nations or regional organisations, or commitments made under WTO agreements, impose obligations and constraints in areas of jurisdiction of state governments.
The second problem of representation, in its external dimension, is more problematic.
Classical diplomacy has been the exclusive preserve and domain of nation-states.
As we survey the practice of diplomacy worldwide, we observe that the departure from the classical definition is very definitive.
These include NGOs focused on environment, human rights and labour issues, international sports bodies, professional federations, business and multinational corporations and academic institutions.
Our diplomacy would have to find means of representation with, and access to, these new actors and engage with them to defend and promote our national interests.
Traversing these uncharted waters would be tricky and would have to be carefully calibrated in view of the strong linkages of many of them with Indian civil society and NGOs, Indian business and industry, our Pravasi Bharatiya Community, and our polity and economy.
I am delighted to be here for the Republic Day Camp of the National Cadet Corps.
I extend my greetings and best wishes for a bright and prosperous New Year to all of you.
The NCC, with its motto of Ekta aur Anushasan (Unity and Discipline) has been providing our young people with opportunities for self-development and avenues to fulfil their potential for growth.
In so doing, NCC is playing an important role in shaping the character and moral fibre of our young people, and ultimately the effectiveness and dynamism of the nation.
I am happy to see the bright and young cadets, smartly turned out and beaming with confidence.
You showcase the dynamism and energy of youth with the discipline and camaraderie instilled by the NCC.
I am sure that the Republic Day Camp will be a memorable, interesting and learning experience for each one of you.
It will give you an opportunity to interact with cadets not only from other parts of the country, but also from friendly foreign countries, who will be joining you shortly.
Experiences such as this camp highlight the essence of universal brotherhood transcending and help you learn valuable life and work skills such as teamwork and leadership.
Your experience in NCC will equip you to become active, responsible members of your communities and that you will go on to make valuable contributions to Indian society on a daily basis in terms of environmental and community activities.
Through programmes like the NCC, the Government of India is investing in today’s youth and India’s future.
The NCC takes upon itself to provide motivated leadership in all walks of life through interactive curriculum and activities like NCC Republic Day Camp.
Your contributions towards social causes have been recognized and a several awards conferred on you.
I compliment you on your efforts.
The nation is indeed very proud of you.
You are a model to the youth of the country.
Your conduct must be exemplary and just.
I urge you to continue with this hard work and achieve your dreams and goals with dedication and distinction.
I am impressed by your turnout and smart drill and I would like to congratulate you all for the same.
Jai Hind
I am very happy to be taking part in today's function.
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the IBN 18 Network and the States who have been warded today for their achievement.
Awards functions such as this are important reminders of the essentially federal nature of our polity.
The future course of our national development is critically dependent on the recognition that there has been a paradigm shift in what constitute the agents of change.
Leaders who can marshal information and technology, foster innovation and entrepreneurship, and provide for creation of essential infrastructure would lead this transformation.
The transformation, however, would neither be homogenous nor uniform, would not be regionally or provincially balanced, nor would there be gradual or incremental changes.
Inequalities within and between states, on a range of metrics, would generate their own political, social and economic pressures.
They need to be assessed in the light of rising aspirations of our citizens and the 'demonstration effect' of successful economic and social transformation taking place not only in our country, but across the world.
I am confident that the distinguished Jury that has gone through the methodologies, data sources, metrics and weights for today's Awards have kept these factors in mind.
I specially applaud the fact that the focus of some of the metrics is not on collectivities but on individual citizens.
Likewise, we need to focus on individual welfare of our citizens, devise measurement and monitoring indices, and work to improve them.
I congratulate the States who have won Awards today and wish the Chief Ministers and Ministers more success in their endeavours.
The nation needs your innovation, determination and zeal to realize the vision of our founding fathers.
I thank the IBN 18 network for inviting me to this award function and wish Rajdeep, Ashutosh and their team continued success in recognizing social and human development in the states of the Union.
It gives me great pleasure to participate in today’s function and give away the National Geoscience Awards for 2009.
I would like to congratulate the distinguished scientists and researchers who have been recognised today for their meritorious contributions in the field of fundamental or applied geosciences, mining and allied areas.
The government has correctly realised the long term importance of geoscience in its fundamental as well as multidisciplinary forms and has enhanced the scope of the National Mineral Award scheme into the National Geoscience Awards.
The process of specialization and integration of multiple disciplines is constantly ongoing and remains the test of our geoscientific capabilities and skills.
Second, Geoscience should be central to our energy and climate change policies.
We live in a world which is moving towards reduction of our carbon footprint and leading to increased efficiency of energy production, utilisation and transmission.
Geoscientists can help us to monitor earth processes, undertake risk assessments and be better prepared for tackling natural, and even man-made, disasters.
Fourth, rapid development would necessitate increased and efficient use of natural resources.
Our demand for minerals and metals would increase along side an increased demand for agricultural products, leading to greater need for land and water resources.
Geoscientists would be required to locate minerals and ores, assess their quality and quantity, and enable their efficient extraction and utilization.
Proper management of this entire chain is indeed crucial for our national security.
Fifth, we need to develop our geo-scientific human resources to meet the demand in terms of numbers and breadth of scientific disciplines.
For the longer term, we need to integrate geosciences into secondary and tertiary education and make it available as a core academic discipline.
Ladies and Gentlemen We must make the necessary investment in terms of time, financial and human resources so that our national policies on energy, climate change, water and land resources, agriculture, disaster management, urbanisation, waste management and infrastructure development are informed by the scientific understanding of geosciences.
I hope that the awards given today and the government’s steps in creating the Geoscience Advisory Council and the National Geoscience Congress would contribute to this effort.
I once again congratulate the awardees and thank the Ministry for inviting to participate in this Conference.
To venture into the realm of law, for someone untutored in the discipline, can fairly be described as foolhardy.
And yet, this is precisely the sin now being committed by this speaker before this august and learned audience.
Since sins committed cannot be undone, the remaining option is to seek forgiveness through penance and repentance.
Well endowed with human frailties, I can only promise an honest try.
Durga Das Basu needs no introduction to students of law and to all those who seek to further their understanding of the robust text of our Constitution.
His treatises on the subject, firmly entrenched in voluminous case law, have become standard source of reference.
Human history shows that legal codes are either bestowed or made.
Once in place, an understanding of the text, and the context, requires comprehension of both.
This takes the form of commentaries.
We do not know if such commentaries existed on the ancient texts of Hammurabi, or Solon.
We do know that Manusmrti attracted nine complete commentaries.
We also know that medieval canonists in Europe or the faqihs in Muslim societies did dilate a good deal on the intent and purpose of their respective codes.
It is true of both the United States and of India.
Both helped induce a spirit of constitutionalism amongst the citizens.
The framers believed that the three strands are mutually dependent and inextricably intertwined.
The efficacy of the functioning of each strand, and a harmonious relationship of each with the other two, was considered by the founding fathers an essential requirement.
Given the constraint of time, and at the risk of selectivity, I would like to confine my remarks today to some aspects of the second strand and think aloud about some features of democracy at work in our society.
The concept of democracy has been dilated upon down the ages.
It is premised on the dignity and freedom of the individual.
To Aristotle, democracy meant the rule of ‘the poor and the majority’; the preferred form, he opined, was one that upheld the supremacy of the law.
Rousseau, on the other hand, considered democracy so perfect a form as to be fit only for ‘a nation of gods’.
The efficacy of these institutions thus becomes the litmus test for assessing the success of democratic practice.
This assessment is to be done in two segments and relates to the ‘hardware’ and ‘software’ of democratic principle and practice.
Most observers agree that in the past six decades we have internalized in some measure the ‘hardware of democracy’ – by this, I mean the mechanisms, mechanics, institutions and procedures of our parliamentary democracy.
Citizens are cognizant of periodic elections to elect their representatives to the Parliament, State Legislatures and Local Government.
This audience knows that parliamentary democracy necessitates government that is Representative, Responsible, and Responsive.
Our record on periodic assessment is good and universally acknowledged.
Ambedkar identified a few essential ingredients of constitutional morality: He also added a word of caution.
It is perfectly possible, he said, to pervert the Constitution without changing its form by merely changing the form of the administration and to make it inconsistent and opposed to the spirit of the Constitution.
III The experience of the last six decades, ladies and gentlemen, demonstrates our success in widening and deepening the mechanisms of democracy, both horizontally and vertically.
In the process we have introduced many innovations including decentralized planning, reservations for women, and establishment of state election commissions and finance commissions.
Democracy today touches the remotest hamlet and the poorest citizen in its working.
What is the corrective?
They are the instruments of our people to implement their agenda and work in accordance with their mandate.
They provide the life blood of the Legislature and the Executive, and constitute the best media of political and social change.
They embody within them the possibilities of realizing our constitutional vision, or of sidestepping it.
Political parties are needed for more than merely exercise of political power.
They set examples of democratic practice, influence the nature of political mobilization, alliance formation and societal accommodation.
By their actions, they can either spark societal conflict or facilitate conflict management.
The legal fraternity too has an important role in spreading the message of constitutional morality and strengthening the ‘software’ of our democracy.
It has  been reared for immortality, if the work of man may justly aspire to such a  title.
It may, nevertheless, perish in an hour by the folly, or corruption, or  negligence of its only keepers, THE PEOPLE.
Republics are created by the virtue,  public spirit, and intelligence of the citizens.
I thank Shri Gopal Subramanium and the Durga Das Basu Centenary Celebration Committee for inviting me to preside over today’s function.
It gives me great pleasure to be present here today to release the Annual Status of Education Report for the year 2010.
For the past five years, Pratham has undertaken this annual exercise of assessing and evaluating the outcomes of education of our children across the length and breadth of the country.
These annual reports remind us that that the first requirement for good public policy is inculcation of scientific temper among the Executive, the Legislature, civil society and citizenry.
ASER’s simple, reliable and scientific methods of sampling and assessment on a nation-wide scale are important for highlighting the “quality agenda” in education.
This is more glaring in the context of our public policy because we neither have an inbuilt evaluation culture nor adequate trained human resources with both technical knowledge and field experience to check and monitor outcomes.
Ladies and Gentlemen A few questions do come to mind: I would like to draw the attention of this distinguished gathering to the first and most important event in education at the dawn of the new century.
It was in April 2000 that the World Education Forum at Dakar adopted the Dakar Framework for Action.
It recognized that education is a fundamental human right, is the key to sustainable development and peace and stability within and among countries, and thus an indispensable means for effective participation in the societies and economies of the twenty-first century, which are affected by rapid globalization.
The international community committed itself at Dakar to achieving free and compulsory universal primary education of good quality by 2015, and eliminating gender disparities in education.
Quality indeed lies at the heart of the goal of “Education for All”.
What happens in classrooms and other learning environments is vitally important to the future of our citizens, and indeed to the future of our Republic.
Ideally, this should not be limited to knowledge alone but also cover skills, attitudes and values.
There is one other aspect of the matter.
Education governance and management at the grass roots and institutional level should be participatory and engage with local communities and cultures.
We have made a positive beginning with the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act 2009.
Civil Society organisations such as ASER and Pratham have an important role in building technical capacity of the members of the School Management Committees.
I once again applaud ASER for their Report for the year 2010 and thank Dr. Rukmini Banerji for inviting me to this function.
This book is vintage MJ.
Incisive analysis, brilliant passages, wide sweep, bold judgements.
One could agree or disagree, but read one must.
It is defined as a small container holding flint, firesteel and tinder, used together to help kindle a fire.
I assume the author intends to depict a flammable or an explosive mix.
Also intriguing is the subtitle: The Past and the Future of Pakistan.
Both themes are valid and worthy of discourse.
This would necessitate closer scrutiny of the ethnic, regional and sociological aspects to comprehend the volatility that characterises the scene.
No less relevant are the direct and indirect consequences of the involvement of the state, and segments of society, in quest of regional strategic objectives.
The book dilates on a concept.
As with other ideas, their interpretation and actualisation is time and space specific.
Some in Pakistan seeking empowerment and legitimisation read into it a political agenda and a military strategy.
A great many scholars and practitioners of Islam the world over would interpret and practice it differently.
Nor should it be forgotten that in the eighties of the last century, the term was lauded and lionised in many of the chancelleries of the world!
One aspect of the past needs a corrective.
It is forgotten that universal adult suffrage did not exist prior to 1950.
Voting rights were based on property, taxes, service in the military forces and literacy and were enjoyed by about 11 percent of the population.
And yet, one cannot confine oneself to a diet of mishaps of the past, or even an unhealthy one of the present.
The pasture of stupidity, said Ibn Khaldun, is unwholesome to mankind.
Wisdom and practical common sense would necessitate course correctives in Pakistan and the people there would find their way of doing it.
We, as immediate neighbours, have a vested interest in the stability and well being of Pakistan and its people.
Higher  Education – Challenges and Imperatives for Change This is a rare privilege.
Few today would associate 1857 with another event of seminal significance.
It was on January 24, 1857 that the Calcutta University Act was enacted.
It was the culmination of a process initiated by Lord William Bentinck and energised by his successor Lord Auckland.
The first Vice Chancellor, Sir James William Colvile, was candid about results.
The alumnae of this institution played a great role in the freedom struggle as also in the furtherance of knowledge in all fields.
The record does speak for itself.
The proclaimed and principal purpose of the university was, and is, ‘Advancement of Learning’.
There was an element of idealism about it.
These were propelled by the enormity of change - political, economic, technological and cultural.
The need to revisit the framework for higher education in the country has been felt in recent years.
Today we have 504 Universities, with varying statutory bases and mandates.
Of these, 40 are Central Universities, 243 are State Universities, 130 are Deemed Universities, five institutions established under State legislation, 53 are State private Universities, and 33 are Institutions of National Importance established by Central legislation.
We have a total teaching faculty of around 6 lakhs in higher education.
The structure and quality of these institutions, and their output, was the subject of critical scrutiny in the Yashpal Committee Report of 2009, tasked to suggest measures for the renovation and rejuvenation of higher education.
You are also aware that one of the focal themes of the Eleventh Five Year Plan is the expansion and enhancement of access to higher education.
Unless we can increase access and educational outcomes at secondary and tertiary levels, our demographic dividend might turn into a demographic liability.
Contrary to conventional wisdom, gross enrolment in higher education is not directly linked to economic growth and prosperity or to elementary school enrolment.
Thus, for example, some of the economically and educationally backward states with respect to literacy rate and school enrolment, such as Orissa, Assam, Jharkhand and Andhra Pradesh have higher enrolments in higher education as compared to relatively better off states such as Tamil Nadu and Karnataka.
It would seem that enrolment is a function of a variety of social, cultural, institutional and economic processes and is significantly affected by the availability of educational infrastructure and facilities.
In addition to expansion, the other two central themes of the Eleventh Plan are inclusion and excellence.
This is recognition of the fact that expansion does not necessarily ensure automatic access to the marginalised sections of the society and that quantitative expansion without maintaining quality would defeat the basic objective.
Currently, Universities can be established only through Central or State legislation or through recognition as Deemed Universities on a selective basis.
Legislation has been accorded to many private Universities by some State Governments, and both Central and State governments have accorded statutory status to some institutions.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that the budget of one central university is almost the same or more than the budget of all state universities in some states.
The Midterm Appraisal of the Eleventh Five Year Plan takes note of this option and has observed:  Third, a significant focus of reform should be the college system, numbering around 26000 colleges, where most of the enrolment in higher education occurs.
Sadly, under graduate education does not get the attention it deserves in universities amidst paucity of funds for qualitative development and quantitative expansion of colleges.
The government is planning to establish colleges in 374 educationally backward districts in the country, representing over 60 per cent of all districts, with shared funding between the state and central governments.
Fourth, we need to liberate education from the strict and fragmented disciplinary confines of our formal higher education structures.
This has become a significant impediment in the creation of new knowledge, especially in view of our stated objective of creating a knowledge society.
We had then allowed free interplay between science and engineering, languages and the humanities, performing and fine arts.
I am aware of academic administrators who bemoan that those pursuing Mathematics could not simultaneously study Sanskrit grammar in India despite sound academic and research logic of doing so, due to systemic rigidities of our university system.
Fifth, higher education in our country must be an arena of choice, not of elimination.
We must create avenues for skills training and vocational education so that entering universities does not become a default choice for the sake of employment, particularly for those who might not have interest in the subject or desire for higher education.
This is a positive development and must be pursued to its logical conclusion.
It is my hope that this distinguished audience, and students, would be part of the ongoing debates on higher education.
Each of you is an important stakeholder in the process and must contribute to it, not only as members of the academic community, but more importantly as citizens of this Republic.
It is only with active engagement that we can hope to mould higher education as an instrumentality to achieve the Constitutional vision propounded by our founding fathers.
I thank the University for inviting me to this function and I am grateful to this audience for your patient hearing.
I am happy to be participating in the 31st Annual Convocation of the National Institute of Design.
I offer my congratulations to students who have won prizes today as also to all of the graduating students.
It is an important occasion for them, their families and their teachers.
The term ‘design’ evokes questions, and possibly suggests some answers.
It was the philosopher Aristotle who held that human nature is inclined to imitate; he propounded the theory that art imitates nature.
This is also true of the idea of design.
Both are reflective of human perception in its interaction with the external world.
The roots of Indian design go back to the urban architecture and town planning of Harappa and Mohenjodaro, to the highly skilled and intricate metallic, ceramic and stone sculptures, to sophisticated classical art forms in music and dance, to intricate and evolved dress materials and sartorial preferences.
Design was an important, yet under-appreciated, element during the freedom struggle.
Gandhiji’s Ashram in Ahmedabad is nearby.
It was here that the Father of the Nation applied himself to evolving an Indian idiom to the freedom movement, characterized by self-reliant systems of design and indigenous means of production.
They strengthened the element of identification with the freedom struggle and have come to represent symbols and message of this aspect of India in the modern era.
In the post-independence period, Jawaharlal Nehru understood the significance of the design element in espousing his vision of a modern nation.
Even as the planning process focused on the temples of modern India, Nehru invited Le Corbusier to design a new city.
Design today is seen mainly from the lens of value addition, enhancing competitiveness, and improving quality of products and services.
It speaks of “global positioning and branding of Indian designs” and “raising Indian design education to global standards of excellence”.
The design paradigm a few decades ago, however, was starkly different.
This Institute owes its origin to The India Report of April, 1958 prepared by famous American designers Charles and Ray Eames at the invitation of our government.
The medium that is producing this change is communication, not some influence of the West on the East.
If the new Republic has to survive, a relentless search for quality must be maintained.
In a resource scarce economy in the pre-reform era, Indians took recourse to ‘jugaad’ and used their creativity, imagination and innovation.
In this era of globalization when our “real villages” have to compete with “the global village”, the problem for many designers is to fuse functionality with our cultural legacy and heritage.
Such designs and products that are identified with our culture, our geography and our Indian-ness would distinguish and fetch a premium in the global market place of ideas, services and products.
This is an invaluable asset in our villages and in the global village.
Each of these elements and influences is a source of innovation and initiative.
You must treasure them, amplify them, and fine tune them as you move to the real world outside.
Friends It is a matter of pride that the Institute is celebrating its Golden Jubilee.
The alumni of this institution have brought laurels to it and to the nation.
I am confident that your journey of the next fifty years would be equally exciting, challenging and innovative.
You will face changes and challenges in the country and at the global level, and will be required to steer through them successfully.
The country expects the faculty to train the next generations of Indian designers in these tasks.
I once again congratulate the prize winners and the graduating students and thank the Institute for inviting me to this Convocation.
I am pleased to participate in the inauguration of the International Conference of Jurists on International Terrorism and Human Rights.
I commend this distinguished audience of jurists, academics and legal experts who have gathered here today to discuss these themes.
It is also topical to discuss human rights, yesterday being the ‘Human Rights Day’.
It was on this day in 1948 that the UN General Assembly adopted and proclaimed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
It remains the universal and fundamental recognition of the fact that the inherent dignity and the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family are the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world.
It is not only an assault on human decency and a negation of fundamental human values, but also knows no boundaries and poses serious threat to human rights.
International terrorism is an international crime, threatening the integrity and political and social fabric of states.
Its sinister element is vastly magnified in its impact when it enmeshes with drug trafficking, arms proliferation, international financial crimes and generic forms of extremism, fundamentalism, separatism and intolerance.
Our globalised world is characterized by enhanced levels of resort to violence by state and non-state actors, within and across borders.
Global threats to peace and security necessitate coordinated and global responses.
We believe that the adoption of a Comprehensive Convention against International Terrorism would provide a solid legal basis for the fight against terrorism.
However, we must also note that legal systems in many countries have resorted to doctrines of necessity to incorporate ‘exceptional’ and ‘extraordinary’ legislation to deal with this surge of violence.
The challenge for governments and legal systems is to deal effectively with violence within the framework of ‘normal’ laws and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Ladies and Gentlemen There is one other important aspect related to the subject matter of this Conference.
The enjoyment of human rights is closely related to the prevalence of good governance norms.
In India we remain committed to democratic governance, inclusive development and the implementation of Rule of Law.
This commitment has been challenged in practice by departures from norms of good governance, manifest through corruption and the deleterious influence of money power.
Corruption has inhibited the enjoyment of human rights, has contributed to inequalities in income, status and opportunities and thus thwarted human development of our citizens.
We must recognise that good governance without any trace of corruption is also a human right.
Friends Human rights today are increasingly discussed in contexts of violence, use of force and terrorism.
The idea that the central objective of human rights is to empower people through human development does not find adequate mention in contemporary debates.
I thank the organisers for inviting me to this function and wish you well in your deliberations.
Hiren Mukherjee was one of our greatest parliamentarians.
Our founding fathers took great pride in the effective working of our Parliament.
Friends Our distinguished guest today is one of the foremost economists of our time.
He has been an ardent advocate of free trade and globalisation and believes that democracy and free trade can deliver sustained economic growth as well as social justice.
He has also shown that different types of growth resulting from the different socio-economic instrumentalities used can affect the poor differentially.
Prof. Bhagwati has addressed the issue of societal inequalities.
The societal threshold of tolerance for the unequal outcomes of capitalism is calibrated by culture, politics, aspirations and whether accumulated capital is used for self indulgence or public good.
The ambit of the term ‘reform’ goes beyond correctives to economic activity.
To what extent have Indian reforms alleviated poverty and addressed inequality is a subject matter not just for the economists.
It would also be pertinent to explore the need for fundamental reforms in non-economic contexts, especially in governance.
We can ill afford the economic, social and political cost of not addressing reforms in these contexts.
I hasten to invite Prof. Bhagwati to address the audience.
It gives me great pleasure to inaugurate this conference on pharmacovigilance.
I am no man of medicine and do not understand the technical intricacies of the subject.
Yet, pharmacovigilance is an important issue of public health and should be of concern for the common citizen.
The government and the regulatory authorities in the country fully appreciate the need for pharmacovigilance.
There is also a perception that drugs that are prohibited in the developed nations for their serious adverse effects are available and used in the developing world.
Effective pharmacovigilance systems that are integrated with the drug control processes are essential for public health and safety.
This is dependent on a comprehensive collection of all data and incidents of adverse drug effects, analyses of the data and effective feedback to enable regulation of the use of drugs.
The Central government has initiated a well structured and highly participative National Pharmacovigilance Programme with the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation engaging various stakeholders such as doctors, pharmacy professionals, the pharmaceutical industry, clinical research organisations and academics.
With the evolving patent regime in the country, experts feel that India might emerge as a hub for new drug trials.
Moreover, our regulatory authorities are also approving an increasing number of new drugs for marketing and use in the country.
It is imperative that we have in place a vibrant and robust pharmacovigilance system to protect our citizens and regulate the pharma and clinical research industry.
I am confident that the deliberations of this Conference would contribute to this national effort.
I once again thank the organisers of this Conference for inviting me and wish you all every success.
I confess I have read, but infrequently, some of the writings of Sudheendra Kulkarni ji.
It is tempting to type caste.
The book before us is one such endeavour, to build a new edifice on the ruins of the past.
The task of the historian, as Ibn Khuldun put it, is to ‘lift the veil’ from conditions of the past.
The present case is also a matter of living memory and therefore not immune from subjectivity of greater intensity.
The ‘post-truth’, in this case, arrived seven decades earlier!
The challenge for us, therefore, is three fold:  The happening of 1947 has rightly been describes as a ‘tragedy’ to which the Two Nation theory contributed.
The British role, and their anxiety to leave India on terms most advantageous to them, is well known.
In the discussions preceding and during the crucial AICC meeting of June 14-15, 1947 opinion was divided but both Jawaharlal Nehru and Vallabhbhai Patel supported Partition.
Their line of reasoning, as per public record, was not identical.
The latter aspect, however, was not investigated or spelt out.
Its underlying assumption is the possibility and desirability of an India-Pakistan Rapprochement.
Our author seeks a solution by plunging headlong into the core of differences.
Common action is easier done on areas of convergence than of divergence.
This convergence is to be sought by moving beyond the traditional paradigm of conventional security into those of human security and human wrong.
Only then would we develop the perception and capacity for correctives.
The common traits in cultural traditions and historical narratives needs to be transmitted to a younger generation through conscious promotion rather than studied prevention of cultural exchanges, films, and other cultural activities.
The experience of SAARC has not been encouraging and therefore alternate strategies need to be explored.
The proposed new structure would have to be voluntary and devoid of overt or covert coercion.
There may be lessons to be learnt from other regional organizations.
The practical approach would be to make haste slowly, to be accommodative rather than exclusionary so that negative perceptions are allowed to fade away.
Foremost amongst these is what the Simla Agreement of 1972 called ‘a final settlement of Jammu and Kashmir’.
The State is doing all that is necessary to confront and repel terrorism.
Alienation of any segment of the citizen body within our land does not contribute to the overall health of the Republic.
Jai Hind.
The couple played a pioneering role in establishing industries and creating employment, empowering women and children through education and vocational training, promoting scientific research and development and furthering public welfare through the establishment of hospitals.
Friends I am particularly happy that this year’s award has been presented to Dr. Karan Singh.
Doctor Saheb is one of the few men in public life who is at ease in the world of philosophy, culture and education.
I had the opportunity of releasing a book authored by Dr. Karan Singh two years ago.
That book left an impression on me and gave an insight into his thinking.
I am happy that today’s award is recognition of his contribution to help manifest the country’s destiny.
I wish Dr. Karan Singh many more years in the service of the nation and the people and thank the Dayawati Modi Foundation for inviting me to present this award.
I thank the Indian Council of World Affairs for inviting me today to inaugurate this seminar on a subject of considerable relevance.
The presence of a good number of scholars from many lands testifies to it.
This is perhaps a good example of the art of evading choices and managing contradictions!
Our focus today is on eight countries that constitute a sub-set of the West Asian region.
Their location and contiguities are relevant.
Six of them (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates) are members of a regional grouping – the Gulf Cooperation Council while the other two – Iran and Iraq – are physically in the sub-region and share commonalities with all others as also with some countries beyond the region.
Given the geography, security perceptions are unavoidably interlinked and turbulence within or around the area usually has a wider impact.
It is Kitab al-Ibar (Book of Lessons).
It would be no exaggeration to say that in relation to our subject of discussion, lessons of history are of relevance.
One of these, pertaining to the concept of dominance and exclusivity, is particularly note worthy.
The British dominance lasted till 1970.
In the past four decades, various bilateral and multilateral, regional and extra-regional, combinations for security have been explored.
Like the earlier versions, selectivity and exclusion rather than inclusion have been their dominant trait.
An un-stated major premise is maintenance of political stability and, by implication, regime security.
In a wider context, however, this view of security is limited and inadequate.
A more holistic approach was articulated by the UN Secretary General Kofi Annan in 2001.
Peace means much more than the absence of war.
Human security can no longer be understood in purely military terms.
A holistic approach of this nature, essential for a fuller understanding of security and insecurity, is perhaps beyond the scope of this conference focused as it seems to be on a more traditional paradigm.
Ladies and Gentlemen It is evident that given the geo-political imperatives of these eight littoral states of the Persian Gulf, security perspectives and threat perceptions do not converge.
Nevertheless, and in relation to this international waterway, some common elements can be discerned.
Interestingly enough Gulf security, in the words of a Saudi scholar, ‘was an external issue long before it was one among the Gulf states themselves’.
The devil is in the un-stated major premise, and in threat perceptions that do not converge sufficiently.
The challenge, then, lies in seeking this convergence in areas of security, politics and economics and in developing procedures that would help bring it about.
Such a process requires agreement on dialogue procedures.
Access to resources thus became more relevant than physical control.
The distance from Mumbai to Basra is 1526 nautical miles while Bander Abbas and Dubai are in a radius of 1000 nautical miles.
Contact through trade and movement of people has roots deep in history, testified to by archaeological finds and written record.
Fascination with India is reflected in Kitab Ajaib al-Hind by Buzurg ibn Shahriyar of Ramhormuz, a tenth century collection of sailor’s tales.
Many proverbs pertaining to India are to be found in the colloquial language of the lower Gulf.
Familiarity with India and Indians at individual and family levels, Mumbai-Hindustani, Mumbai-Biryani and Bollywood films contribute to it in good measure particularly in the GCC countries.
Given this proximity, it is hardly surprising that in the period after 1975 there has been a significant spurt in economic linkages between the region and India.
It is significant that given the affinities of the past and the experience of recent decades, the public and political establishments in the littoral states are India-friendly and Indian friendly.
A state of preparedness for responding to other contingencies should also be catered for, in consonance with the developing dimensions of maritime security.
However, the apprehension of an unstable status quo also looms over the horizon.
III Ladies and Gentlemen Despite the successes of the GCC, attempts to foster a comprehensive Gulf regional cooperation have a history of over three decades and are replete with failed strategies of local or global hegemony.
There are ideas and precedents elsewhere that can be drawn upon beneficially.
Asian regionalism and community-building has remained, albeit unevenly, an important framework for cooperation and framework within the continent.
We thus have strong regional organisations focused on constituent sub-regions such as ASEAN, GCC, SAARC, SCO, BIMSTEC and the MGC.
It should instead articulate an inclusive, open and transparent process of community building.
Secondly, it should not be a reflection of the emerging redistribution of global or regional power nor should it be a platform for projection of narrow economic and political interests of a nation, an alliance or a group of nations.
And  Finally, it must not be seen as means to limit state sovereignty but as instrumentalities to address complex regional problems through cooperation and partnership.
I am confident that this conference would shed useful light on these perceptions and contribute to the effort.
I wish it all success.
I thank Ambassador Deware for inviting me to inaugurate this Conference.
I am happy to participate in the Eighth India Today Chief Ministers Conclave on the State of States Report.
I take this opportunity to congratulate the states who have been awarded today for specific aspects of governance and of human and socio-economic development.
It is universally acknowledged that one dimension of the Indian genius pertains to excellence in mathematics.
This also manifests itself in our fondness for statistics.
Quantitative data, however, often does not dwell on quality and tells the story partially.
This year’s Report is on ‘Development in times of Naxalism’.
The Naxalite movement emerged four decades earlier.
The challenge of reconciling the imperatives of development, equity and national security continue to confront the state apparatus and the civil society.
No analysis of the ground reality can escape the centrality of the problem to the 70 million tribal population of Central India, spread over ten states of the Union.
These citizens score the lowest in the Human Development Index when compared to other population groups.
They suffer from geographical and social exclusion, high poverty rates and lack of access to appropriate administrative and judicial mechanisms.
Low level of infrastructural endowments and growing gap in infrastructure creation in tribal areas, as compared to the rest of India, has further diminished prospects for progress.
Friends I wish to highlight a few aspects of this question today.
These relate to forest rights, the lack of effective implementation of constitutional and statutory provisions for tribal populations, the difficulties faced in their political mobilization, the need for a new development paradigm in tribal areas and the multiple vulnerabilities of the tribal people.
Land thus represents the most important source of livelihood, emotional attachment and social stability in tribal communities.
The alienation of tribal land is the single most important cause of pauperisation of tribals, rendering their vulnerable economic situation more precarious.
This is sought to be reversed by the Forest Rights Act of 2006.
In her Address to Parliament in June 2009, the President of India emphasized the need to ensure distribution, by end of December 2009, of title deeds to all eligible claimants under the Act.
Sadly, while some States and some districts within states have achieved excellent progress in the distribution of titles, other States and districts are lagging far behind.
Secondly, the Constitution of India provides specific social, economic and political guarantees to the Scheduled Tribes.
The economic provisions are covered under Article 46, 275(1) and 335.
The political provisions are very elaborate and are spelt out in Article 244 and 5th and 6th Schedules of the Constitution, as also in Articles 330, 332, and 243 (D).
Specific responsibilities have also been assigned to Governors and to the Central Government.
The actual implementation of these Constitutional provisions is a matter of some concern.
Thirdly, in comparison to other disadvantaged communities and groups, the Adivasis have been less effective in constituting themselves as a Pan-Indian interest group and in articulating their grievances through the formal political system.
Many Adivasis also straddle multiple dimensions of deprivation and vulnerability.
Besides being Scheduled Tribes, many of the Adivasis are also religious and linguistic minorities.
It is therefore essential that the protections afforded by the Constitution to the religious and linguistic minorities be fully made available to tribal communities that qualify.
Ladies and Gentlemen The violent manifestations of discontent and unrest in our tribal areas, emanating from exclusion and alienation, calls for serious introspection.
An equitable solution to this has to be found.
Inclusive growth necessitates aligning our development needs with Adivasi rights and enhancing their Human Development Index.
I thank the India Today Group, Shri Aroon Purie and Shri M. J. Akbar for inviting me to this Conclave.
Indian Culture in a Globalised  World This conference coincides, purposely, with the birth anniversary of a great Indian whose name is associated with this auditorium.
I refer of course to Abul Kalam Azad whom Jawaharlal Nehru described as ‘an extraordinarily interesting companion’ at a time when they were incarcerated in adjourning cells in a British jail.
He was prone to question the fundamentals.
II Our subject today verges on the amorphous.
It seeks elucidation and linkages of three concepts: globalization, culture, and Indian culture.
While the first is commonly viewed solely as an economic phenomenon, the other two have been subjected to considerable philosophical and sociological analysis.
All three tempt the uninitiated to wonder off in a speculative labyrinth.
The concept is viewed in two distinct ways: in a positive sense to describe a process of integration into the world economy, and in a normative sense to prescribe a strategy of development based on a rapid integration with the world economy.
The economic aspect, critical though it is, does not cover the entire ambit of the phenomenon that has political, social and cultural dimensions.
Much light on these was shed by the Report of the World Commission on the Social Dimensions of Globalisation published by the International Labour Organisation in 2004.
Other dimensions of globalisation are equally relevant.
This goes hand in hand with the erosion of the traditional concepts of the nation-state, national economies and national culture and tends to produce new forms global mass culture dominated or heavily influenced by new ways of expression and imagery.
Some definitional clarity is essential to this discussion.
For our purpose today, a working definition is available in UNESCO’s Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity adopted in November 2001.
In our common parlance, culture has connotations to the idea of a fixed locality.
Globalisation, and the complex connectivity that goes with it, thus threatens this understanding of culture and introduces the notion of mobility and a loosening of the linkage to specific area or territory.
Nor do the latter remain uninfluenced by the process of this loosening and global cultural flows do invade the local space.
To that extent, cultural practices remain at the heart of globalisation and shape it.
The Iranian philosopher Abdolkarim Soroush has addressed the question of cultural identity and cultural allegiance in terms relevant to our discourse.
Our preference has been for the salad bowl rather than for the melting pot.
III Before we consider the place of Indian culture in such a new world, perhaps not yet a brave one, an element of clarity is essential about it.
Jawaharlal Nehru’s precision of expression in the matter is noteworthy.
Indian culture, he wrote, is ‘the palimpsest on which the imprints of succeeding generations have unrecognisably merged.’ Mahatma Gandhi expressed it differently.
I would, therefore, like to confine my remarks to some aspects of public policy for which the ethos of Indian culture has some relevance.
I refer to the notion of accommodation of diversity in modern societies.
The uniqueness of Indian experience is principally responsible for this.
Our plural society is an existential reality; we have consciously adopted a democratic polity and a secular state structure.
Our diversity emanates from the first characteristic, and is expressed through the second and the third.
Diversity is an Indian passion: we live it, tolerate it, accommodate it, and relish it.
Contestation is thus inherent, but it manifests itself most of the time in an agreed framework.
In a world so full of variety, it must necessarily occur elsewhere too.
A cursory survey of the past five decades unravels patterns of response ranging from rejection to accommodation in varying degrees.
The progression of comprehension has not been uniform; in fact, in recent years and in many societies, regression is the dominant trend.
The retreat has been both at the level of theory and of policy.
It is suggested by some that the tidal wave of economic globalisation carries with it the imperative of cultural homogenisation.
Empirical evidence does not sustain this argument.
A competitive edge internationally necessitates quality and creativity; the latter is influenced by the cultural environment in which the local rather than international plays the dominant role.
The appreciation and celebration of diversity thus becomes an economic strategy as well as a cultural and political one.
Being the confluence of ideas, values and traditions it cannot but be inherently syncretic.
While maintaining the purity of individual traditions, dance forms, music, literature and art, it accepts the authenticity of others and often synthesises them into newer and richer forms.
The same holds good for manifestations of diversity in the daily life of the people, be it in language, cuisine, clothing, behaviour patterns.
The imperative of a common market, and of a common political system, has induced intermingling.
All of this finds reflection in popular culture and above all in films.
Fringe trends apart, assimilation and homogenisation are viewed neither as feasible nor desirable.
The richness of values secreted in the interstices of Indian culture was known and appreciated long before the era of present day globalisation.
It left its imprint on the culture and civilisation of East Asian, South-east Asian, Central Asian and West Asian lands.
The Western world too discovered some aspects of it in the colonial period.
The new world now taking shape amplifies and magnifies them.
These traits of culture go beyond national experience in the political sense and are reflective of the genius of a civilisation.
I commenced this talk with Maulana Azad.
I thank Dr. Karan Singh ji for inviting me today.
I am confident that the proceedings of this Seminar would contribute greatly to the compendium of perceptions on this very relevant subject.
I feel greatly privileged to participate in today’s function to celebrate the National Education Day and commemorate the birth anniversary of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad.
This great freedom fighter, Islamic scholar, secularist and institution-builder needs no introduction to this audience.
Maulana Azad made no compromises on national unity and on educating the citizens of India.
He was an ardent advocate of Mahatma’s Basic Education and of vocational training and adult education.
He laid the base for higher education and for technological and scientific research and education that was instrumental in industrialisation and the recent emergence of knowledge-based industries.
He was also clear about the primary purpose of education.
The National Policy on Education 1986 mentions the following:   Ladies and Gentlemen About 2 crore children are born every year.
It addresses the educational needs of over 19 crore children.
Focused interventions have ensured that the gender gap in enrolment at elementary level has been reduced significantly.
Furthermore, the Gross Enrolment Ratio in respect of SCs and STs has rapidly increased narrowing the gap with the rest of the population.
Yet, problems remain.
The impact of the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan in areas listed in Schedule V and VI of the Constitution, among SCs and STs, Muslim concentration areas and slums has not been very significant.
Around two-thirds of children in government schools in Grade 5 have been unable to do division problems.
The Report also reveals that many students are resorting to paid private tuition across the country, in both government and private schools, and even at Grade One.
I wish the National Education Day celebration all success and thank Kapil Sibal ji for inviting me to inaugurate today’s function.
This is one of those infrequent occasions when the Rajya Sabha and the Lok Sabha Members come together for a meeting to honour, and hear, a visiting dignitary of great eminence.
Relationships between countries, Mr. President, are reflective of a complex web of considerations.
Some of these are ephemeral, others more durable.
The latter pertain to principles and values that transcend material considerations.
We admire the tenacity of the American spirit and its capacity for introspection and course correction.
You have demonstrated both during your presidency.
The troubled world we live in necessitates it.
We appreciate your initiative to “seek the peace and security of a world without nuclear weapons” and to take concrete steps towards it.
We ourselves have been for long an advocate of non-discriminatory and universal nuclear disarmament.
In over six decades of independence, India has endeavoured to impart substance to the principles of liberty, equality and fraternity and to promote political as well as social and economic justice.
We have accommodated diversity.
Above all, we have sought to eschew conflict and promote peace.
The United States and India, Mr. President, have much to do together.
Our areas of agreement are considerable, and expanding.
We venture to hope that our two countries would work purposefully for an open world based on the principles of equity and dedicated to peace, freedom and prosperity for all people.
I am happy to be participating in this Convocation as the Chancellor of the University on my first visit to Gandhigram.
The place and the University are unique in many ways.
Gandhigram, born in 1947, is as old as independent India.
The Institute, founded in 1956, reflected the undying faith and deep devotion of its founders to Mahatma Gandhi’s revolutionary concept of ‘Nai Talim’ system of education.
It has developed its own approach to synergizing academic, research and extension programmes in Rural Development, Rural Economics and Rural Oriented Sciences, Development Administration, Rural Sociology, and English and Indian Languages.
The University’s contribution to rural education is today nationally and internationally recognized.
Gandhigram’s experiment to demonstrate the important role of work in education is still a work-in-progress.
Speaking at the second National Basic Education Conference in April 1941 in Jamia Nagar, Dr. Zakir Hussain had remarked:  "A  work-school is a society working for a common end.
It teaches its  members how to cooperate in spite of their differences of ability and  temperament, it teaches them to accept responsibility for their social duties.
But the school, like the individual, must work for something more than itself,  or it will merely substitute corporate greed for individual greed.
Friends Today I would like to address the concerns and problems of agricultural research in India.
Agriculture, including crop and animal husbandry, fisheries, forestry and agro-processing, is a critical element towards ensuring food and livelihood security for our citizens.
The agricultural sector provides key support for economic development and social transformation, as it accounts for 15.7 per cent of the GDP and provides employment to 52 per cent of our work force.
Research has been a prime driver of agricultural growth in India and hence an essential component of our national mission of poverty alleviation and ensuring a decent life to all of our citizens.
Agricultural research and development faces systemic, institutional and financial problems in the country.
While agriculture is a state subject, the bulk of agricultural research is carried out in central government organizations and is primarily in the public domain.
We spend about 0.6 per cent of our agricultural GDP on agricultural Research and Development.
The touchstone to assess the impact of agricultural research is to see whether it has benefited poor farmers and poor regions in the country.
Two issues come to mind.
It needs no reiteration that the poor would immensely benefit with a research focus on farming systems with lower levels of input usage and sustainable resource utilization.
Agricultural research must focus on commodities that are relevant to the rural poor and on the conditions under which they produce these agricultural commodities.
Third, the private sector in India, with a minor role in technology generation, has been more effective in ensuring commercial success in popularizing seeds such as BT cotton, hybrids such as maize, rice and sunflower.
This was done, without much support from the public extension system, mainly by responding to the demand of farmers.
The public sector technology generation, on the other hand, has become a supply-driven process “of putting technologies on the shelf of the scientists without adequate regard to farmers’ needs and perceptions and with insufficient marketing of the technology”.
Dear students The agriculture sector is not immune from the knowledge-centric economy of today.
We live in a world where even manual labour is best optimized through knowledge-based processes.
Gandhian approaches towards rural development and the agriculture sector would also need to be integrated into our knowledge economy for realizing their objectives.
I am glad that Gandhigram Rural University has taken the initiative in transforming itself into a rural knowledge hub to empower farmers and rural citizens to make optimum use of new rural and agricultural technologies.
The key to alleviating rural poverty is to ensure access to information and enable seamless communication on a wide range of themes including businesses, farming practices, government policies, health and education issues and the rights and obligations of citizens.
I once again congratulate Shri Balasubramaian and the awardees of prizes and medals.
I wish all graduating students every success in their future professional and personal endeavours.
I thank the Vice Chancellor of the University and the Syndicate and the Senate for inviting me to this Convocation.
As the second oldest agricultural university in the country, the university has been a pioneer in educating generations of graduates in agricultural science and technology, animal husbandry and veterinary science, promoting extension programmes and in fostering agricultural research.
Convocation is a special day in the life of every student.
For professionals like you, it marks the entry into a select group of those who have made notable contribution to their profession and to the specific requirements of the farmers of Orissa.
I also take this opportunity to heartily congratulate the distinguished scientists who have been conferred with Honoris Causa for their outstanding achievement and services rendered.
I also congratulate all the graduating students, especially those who have been awarded medals and prizes for their academic excellence.
Indeed, the last six decades have seen the dramatic transformation of Indian agriculture from shortages to surpluses.
The nation has achieved food grain self sufficiency by enhancing production from around 50 million tonnes in 1950 to over 230 million tonnes today.
This was achieved through the Green Revolution that brought about through strong political will and environment of favourable infrastructure, new technology induction, policy support and energized agricultural extension system.
Yet, recent trends of the last fifteen years are a cause of concern.
After improving steadily from 1980 to 1997, the terms of trade turned against agriculture since 1999.
The Government of India had also announced a “New Deal to Rural India” focused on reversing the declining trend in public investment in agriculture with a special emphasis on irrigation, waste-land development, agricultural research and extension.
This is anomalous looking at record food grain production in recent years.
Second, agriculture provides employment to around 52 per cent of our workforce.
Around half of all those engaged in agriculture are illiterate and a miniscule 5 per cent of them have completed higher secondary education.
It thus has a disproportionately important role in achieving a higher and inclusive GDP growth, food security, employment expansion and poverty alleviation.
Private sector investment in agriculture in the last decade in real terms has only increased by 48 per cent, in comparison to public sector investment which has witnessed 180 percent increase.
State Agricultural Universities have an important role to play in agricultural research.
The Eleventh Plan speaks of these State Universities as “the key to regionally relevant research and for generating quality human resources”.
Orissa is blessed with a diverse range of agro-climatic conditions, flora and fauna.
The role of this University in developing viable adaptation and mitigation measures to deal with this and to capitalize on the rich bio-diversity is thus of prime importance.
The University’s role in the areas of crop improvement, crop production, natural resource management, crop protection, post-harvest technology and extension education would always be remembered.
It has also developed technologies related to livestock, fish, mechanized farming and management of land and water.
I once again congratulate all of you and especially those conferred with Honoris Causa and those who received prizes and medals.
I thank the Chancellor and Vice Chancellor of the University for inviting me to this Convocation.
Excellencies I thank the Chair for this opportunity to address you.
Fragile economic recovery and weak private demand in developed economies has meant that while dealing with such sovereign debt problems we must give utmost priority to fiscal consolidation.
Yet, a cookie-cutter would not work and a differentiated strategy would need to be crafted to take into account the special circumstances of each country.
International trade and investment thus offers an important route forward towards non-inflationary and sustainable global economic recovery.
Developing economies are focusing on increasing domestic demand, especially through enhanced infrastructure investment.
We therefore need to facilitate for this purpose enhanced multilateral and private capital flows to developing economies.
The fact that some of these measures are focused on services and manufacturing sectors where developing economies tend to have a comparative advantage, adds to the problem.
Needless to say, we believe a successful completion of the Doha Development Round would be a strong signal and provide a growth impetus to the global economy.
Excellencies We in India have addressed the crisis through an effective fiscal and monetary stimulus and have contained its impact on our economy.
Yet, this is lower than the average level of growth experienced earlier.
Our approach is thus in step with the overarching theme of ASEM 8 which is “Achieving greater well being and more dignity for all citizens”.
Thank you.
I am pleased to be in your midst here in the beautiful Naga Heritage Village, Kisama on the occasion of the World Bamboo Day celebration.
I congratulate the government of Nagaland, especially the Chief Minister, and the World Bamboo Organization for taking the initiative to organize this important event.
The World Bamboo Day is a day of celebration to increase the global awareness of bamboo and promote its sustainable utilization.
It is also appropriate that the theme chosen for this festival is “Bamboo for Community and Livelihood”.
The North East region of India, though underdeveloped in economic terms, is extremely rich in natural resources.
Bamboo is a prominent natural resource of the region.
This precious natural gift has been integral to the life and survival of all the ethnic groups of North Eastern India over the centuries.
Ladies and Gentlemen  The importance of Bamboo is enhanced in the backdrop of global concerns of ecology and environment and the looming threat of global warming and climate change.
Bamboo is emerging as the most viable wood substitute.
Furthermore, as the fastest growing plant on earth, it is a renewable resource with short gestation.
We are also witnessing an expansion in the uses to which bamboo is being put to.
Apart from its utility as food and medicine, in minor tools, implements and daily utilities, bamboo is extensively used for handicrafts, furniture and even art.
Its application has expanded to boards, ply and shuttering materials for use in buildings and construction.
It has also been developed as an energy source in the form of charcoal, activated carbon and even to generate electricity through gasification.
Realizing the immense socio-economic potential of bamboo, the Government of India has launched the National Bamboo Mission (NBM) and the National Mission on Bamboo Application (NMBA) for its holistic development, cultivation and for developing the technologies and applications for bamboo based products.
Development of bamboo as an enterprise is focused on developing bamboo-based industries, service sectors and ancillary activities including tourism.
The Nagaland Bamboo Development Agency has a mission to generate new employment opportunities based on bamboo.
I congratulate the Chief Minister and the state government for taking such initiatives and call on other bamboo producing states to emulate this example.
I am confident that the economic and technological capabilities of our nation can bring about a Bamboo revolution in the country.
I extend my best wishes to all the participants here today and once again thank the Chief Minister for inviting me to this function.
Enhancing India’s Productivity: Role of Global Standards It is an honour to be here to deliver the Visvesaraya memorial lecture.
I thank the organizers for inviting me here today.
M. Visvesaraya was an engineering genius.
World trade has been a driver of human growth since time immemorial and has always adapted itself to changing requirements.
The major challenges presently facing our economy include an increasing trade deficit, and the need to generate employment for millions of youth joining the workforce.
We are recognized for our services sector that contributes more than 60% to India’s GDP.
Growth in manufacturing can be a possible long term solution to meet the twin challenges of an increasing trade deficit and the need to generate employment for millions of youth joining our workforce.
In other words; manufacturing sector growth can be the ‘tipping point’ for increasing the GDP growth in India.
Indian manufacturing, however, needs to improve in terms of productivity and efficiency to compete in a globalized market.
During 2010-12, TFP contributed 11% to GDP growth in India.
By comparison, its share in China's GDP growth was 26%.
There is no dearth of human resources and technical competence in our country.
The Government has rolled out policies and regulations, including the flagship ‘Make in India’, to encourage manufacturing in India.
Of course, there are no silver bullets and one policy measure cannot change the dynamics of the sector and make India the most desirable place to manufacture for any particular sector.
In order to enhance the productivity and quality of Indian manufacturing to make it more competitive in international arena, observers have emphasized the need for early adoption of global standards in conjugation with other measures.
They govern the design, operation, manufacture, and use of nearly everything that mankind produces.
There are standards to protect the environment and human health and safety, accounting and to mediate in commercial trans¬actions.
Other standards ensure that different products are compatible when linked to¬gether.
There are even standards of acceptable behavior within a society.
Countries desiring to participate in international business need to be prepared to adopt standards, conventions and model laws that the major trading nations have already implemented as part of their law.
The adoption of such uniform laws creates an enabling environment to facilitate international trade and investment.
The global technology standard has become the source of a core competitive edge for industrial development.
These include:  Yet the adoption of these Global Standards is not without concerns.
The development of complex technol¬ogy standards requires a multi-disciplinary set of skills and experience.
Effective participation in standardization projects requires a multi-disciplinary view that includes business, commerce, trade, and public policy issues such as health, safety, the environment, energy, sustainability, ethics, and an assessment of potential legal risks, in addition to engineering, scientific and technology skills.
In short, par-ticipation in global standardization projects requires considerable preparation.
Adoption of global standards will improve our productivity and enable Indian companies to access the global export market.
As the software industry has shown, growth of an industry often first comes from the export market, this can be replicated in manufacturing as well.
The export market is also, generally, more profitable and growth in exports will reduce the trade deficit.
Our industry needs to prepare better and in the process expand its global reach.
Jai Hind.
It gives me great pleasure to participate in today’s function and give away the National Photo Awards 2010.
Photographs and photography are now a part of our daily existence.
They are taken for granted and the only question ever asked is about technology and technique.
Both are important; both evolve and make an impact on the human mind.
Depiction of images evolved with the progress of civilisation.
The paintings in Ajanta caves exhibit excellence.
So do the miniature paintings of the medieval period of our history.
Modern photography thus has an excellent pedigree.
Capturing and recording an image, whether in painting or in photography, requires technique as well as art and creativity.
The painter has the luxury of time and of shaping the image mentally before depicting it on paper or canvass.
This process, for the photographer, has to be instantaneous.
He/she has to have an eye for the unusual, the exceptional, the rare and the ability to catch the mood, the look, the ambiance.
It does likewise with inanimate objects or occasions.
The photo albums retained as cherished treasures by individuals and families testify to the emotional value attached to recalling these moments.
What is true of individuals is true of societies.
The four individuals selected by the Award Committee stand out by virtue of their professional contributions.
I congratulate the Award winners.
I thank Ambika Soni ji and the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting for inviting me today.
I remain confident that the Photo Division will continue to contribute in ever increasing measure to recording our progress as a nation.
Jai Hind.
This is an occasion for celebration of excellence and I thank the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha for inviting me to join it.
This Award was initiated, belatedly in my view, in 1995 and I congratulate the Indian Parliamentary Group for sustaining it.
I take this opportunity to extend my felicitations to Shri Priya Ranjan Dasmunshi, Shri Mohan Singh and Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi for being the distinguished recipients of the Outstanding Parliamentarian Award for the years 2007, 2008 and 2009.
In each case, the honour was preceded by sustained and seminal contribution to the functioning of our parliamentary democracy.
This audience is well aware that discussion and persuasion are amongst the pre-requisites of democracy.
In both cases, persuasion emanates either from cold reasoning and hard logic or is based on rhetoric that reinforces probable knowledge with an appeal to the sentiments and emotions of the audience.
The skilled parliamentarian uses both.
The objective in each case is to prevail in discussion.
The Parliament of India has witnessed these skills in good measure and benefited from them.
Long time parliament-watchers have also opined that the skilled parliamentarian is tending to become a rarity.
This should be a cause for concern.
It is said that we are by nature argumentative.
If so, parliamentary deliberation should thrive in our midst.
A contrary trend, however, often tends to surface.
In it, oratorical skills are replaced by lung power and discussion is sought to be drowned in noise and disruption.
It creates momentary excitement, but is no substitute for persuasion.
It detracts from the dignity of Parliament and invites public scorn.
It also assigns specific roles to the elected representative for whom the choice of form and forum becomes critical.
Legislation, deliberation and seeking accountability are the three principal areas of activity that must be explored on a continuous basis within the legislative chamber.
The three Award winners today and many others before them earned name and fame by skilful indulgence in each of these.
They set standards worthy of emulation.
Jai Hind.
It gives me great pleasure to participate in the Convocation of a premier academic and research institution of the country.
I congratulate the graduating students and those who have received medals and awards for their academic achievements.
I also take this opportunity to congratulate Dr. Anil Kakodkar who has been conferred the Degree of Doctor of Science (Honoris Causa) for his outstanding contributions and achievements in the field of nuclear science and engineering.
Let me also congratulate the awardees of the Distinguished Alumni Award.
The nation also appreciates the unsung efforts of the many dedicated and committed faculty of the IIT, Delhi that have helped mould and transform the professional and personal growth of this student body.
Convocations should also be moments of introspection about the purpose of education, its role in society and in the life of the nation.
Friends Yours is a critical discipline.
Allow me to draw attention to some data that makes disturbing reading:   Another set of figures, from the US National Science Foundation, depict the paradox.
Students from India and those of Indian origin and numbering 35,300 accounted for over one-third of all foreign engineering students in the United States in 2009.
A focus at the top end, essential for excellence, does not obviate the need for correctives at other levels.
We need in the first place to focus on accessible learning, affordable learning, and applicable learning.
We need to close the gap between policy intent and actual delivery.
It underlines the need for consonance and for methodologies to achieve it.
The evolutionary context of any technology determines the purposes to which they would be deployed.
Increasingly, in this era of globalization transforming technologies are emerging in corporate contexts and are being deployed to primarily serve narrow corporate interests and stakeholders.
Thus, the shrinking base of stakeholders in the development and deployment of technologies is fast eroding their political and social legitimacy.
It is increasingly felt that these technologies are widening societal inequalities and deepening political conflict.
The situation has also been compounded by the lack of political initiative and social impetus by national leaderships and community elders.
Two experiences in our own country illustrate the point.
The Green Revolution in the 1970s and the IT revolution in this decade have been epochal technological influences on our society.
The Information Technology revolution of this decade raises similar issues.
Technology diffusion to the masses has also become difficult due to lack of access to telecom infrastructure, electrical infrastructure or even literary skills and financial resources which the poor and the marginalized do not possess.
A legitimate question arises whether the utilization and deployment of information technology has been an enabler in equalizing opportunities to all of our citizens to better their situation in life.
Technological, scientific or digital divides in societies can not further the larger human cause.
Today’s professionals can not function in isolation of the social and political context nor can they remain in ivory towers or professional silos.
One more dimension can be added to the argument.
We know that the past informs the present and helps shape the future.
A historian of eminence noted some years back that the 20th century ended in global disorder whose nature was unclear.
At the same time, it was unquestionably the greatest period of human history in terms of science, technology and innovation.
This trend will persist.
The American scientist Bill Hibbard wrote two years back that progress of biology, neuroscience and computer science will make possible in the foreseeable future technologies of mind and life that will invalidate the working social assumptions of societies.
Friends The graduating students today represent the young citizenry that constitutes the overwhelming majority of our population.
I once again congratulate the medal and award winners, Dr. Anil Kakodkar, winners of the Distinguished Alumni Awards and all the graduating students and wish you success in your professional and personal endeavours.
I thank Prof. Surendra Prasad for inviting me to this convocation.
I am happy to participate in today’s function and give away the National Amity Award for promoting social harmony instituted by the Foundation for Amity and National Solidarity.
The Foundation deserves our appreciation for its dedicated work for promoting amity, fraternity and brotherhood through out the country and thus contributing to national integration and social harmony.
The Late Shri Sunil Dutt thus joins the illustrious list of previous awardees.
The Preamble mentions that such fraternity should assure the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the nation.
Shri Sunil Dutt undertook this fundamental duty till his last breath.
His role during natural, and man-made calamities, best represented what every citizen should do in pursuit of his or her fundamental duty to the nation.
I am confident that the central message of Shri Sunil Dutt’s endeavours would continue through Ms. Priya Dutt and organizations like the Foundation for Amity and National Solidarity.
We must remember that, like everything else in life, social harmony and national integration must be nurtured and worked upon, consciously, at the level of individual citizens, social groups and communities, civil society and by the State.
I thank the Foundation and Shri Virendar Mohan Trehan for inviting me to this function and wish it all success in its endeavours.
It deals with a seemingly familiar subject but approaches it innovatively and meaningfully.
In the process, it questions, perhaps demolishes, some major premises.
That, indeed, is a measure of changes underway in our understanding of the subject.
Prof. Damodaran puts forth an important proposition: that global commons are, in the first place, local commons.
This would necessitate a fundamental paradigm shift.
That is easier said than done.
We live in a world of nation-states and are structured to mobilize people and communities within them.
This, he asserts, is to be achieved through diversity as a principle of global environmental governance.
The challenge, then, is to combine global perception and local application and also to attain and retain a balance.
I am not competent to judge if the solution offered is altogether satisfactory.
It will certainly induce thinking on a theme critical to the future of humankind.
Prof. Damodaran has earned our gratitude for doing so.
The vast majority of humanity does not support any dilution of the principles of equity, common but differentiated responsibilities, and respective capabilities.
I am happy to be in North Malabar whose name and fame far extends beyond our country.
It gives me great pleasure to participate in today’s function organized by the North Malabar Chamber of Commerce and the A. K. Nair Memorial Endowment Committee.
The A. K. Nair Award for Excellence recognizes the contribution of eminent personalities from Kerala for their accomplishments in their professions at both the national and international levels.
It is very appropriate that the Endowment Committee has decided to confer the Thirteenth A. K. Nair Memorial Award on Shri T. K. A. Nair, Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister.
Shri Nair needs no introduction to this audience or any other audience.
It also merits a recognition of a category of human being called civil servant.
I am happy to participate in today’s function to inaugurate the Inter University Centre for Biosciences established by the Government of Kerala in Kannur University.
At the outset, I must congratulate the state government for its initiative in establishing Inter University Centres in eight fields of academic study in various universities in the state.
These Inter-University Centres, functioning in an autonomous manner, facilitate and promote the nucleation and growth of active groups in specific fields of research.
They also foster the development of centres of excellence within the university sector for teaching, research and development in specialized disciplines.
I am also confident that it would provide an impetus to harnessing the herbal wealth and traditional knowledge systems in the North Malabar region, within the framework of advanced science and technology.
This can be achieved in the context of inter disciplinary study and research, interface with academic institutions, the national laboratory system and the industry.
I hope that in addition to core academic programmes, the Inter University Centres will also promote visitor academic programmes and assist in continuing education of the teaching fraternity.
It would also promote better interaction and movement between academia and industry.
The Institute has over the last three decades played an important role in developing managerial skills and leadership qualities in personnel employed by the government, private and public sectors.
It has also been recognized by the Department of Personnel and Training, Government of India as the Nodal Agency for Capacity Building in RTI for officials and the general public.
The RTI knowledge portal launched today is expected to perform an important function.
The RTI Act represents a legislative recognition of the view of the Supreme Court that the right to information was a fundamental right under the Constitution.
It has given a new meaning to citizen engagement with governance.
The RTI Act imposes new obligations on all stakeholders.
The government is called upon to be more transparent and accountable in decision and policy making, and manage its records better.
This makes possible the participation of citizens in governance beyond elections.
Initiatives such as the RTI Knowledge Portal play an important role in capacity building of those who seek, and those who provide, information under the Act.
It is also heartening that efforts are being made to disseminate information and provide training in Malayalam.
The Portal has added significance in the state of Kerala which has cent per cent literacy and where many citizens are comfortable with digital media.
I am confident that this Knowledge Portal would go a long way in achieving the aims and objectives of RTI Act.
I thank Chief Minister, Shri V. S. Achuthanandan for inviting me to this function.
This seminar focuses on a theme vital to the functioning of our democracy and I am, therefore, happy to be here to inaugurate it.
The C. Achyutha Menon Study Centre and Library plays an important role in the intellectual and academic life of Thiruvananthapuram and has served as an important platform for social science research.
The subject matter of the seminar intersects the domains of theory and practice and has implications for both.
There is, nevertheless, a need to revisit the concepts, premises, definitions and domains since systematic restatements do help in clarifying the form of facts under scrutiny.
Political representation could take different forms; it could be formalistic, symbolic, descriptive or substantive.
Any of these puts in place a set of markers, of authorization and accountability, to assess the efficacy and success of the exercise of representative democracy thus undertaken.
A similar electoral system of proportional representation through a single transferable vote with different electorates has also been prescribed for the elections of the President and the Vice President.
Since every decision has a context, a re-look at the occasion and the legislative intent is educative.
The issue of representativeness came up for discussion in the Constituent Assembly in the Report on Minority Rights that was submitted on 8th August, 1947.
Electoral systems also have an undue influence on the evolution of party systems, their role and their cohesion.
They can encourage inner-party democracy or can suppress dissent.
Electoral systems can also influence the nature of political mobilization, alliance formation and societal accommodation.
They can spark societal conflict or facilitate conflict management.
It is thus important for us to consider our electoral system in the context of our experience of the last six decades, the mandate of our constitutional framework and the future outcomes that we desire from our polity.
I have attempted today to focus on some dimensions of electoral reforms which, I believe, have not been sufficiently addressed.
I believe we should also guard against mechanistic analyses and suggestions for electoral reform.
I wish all of you purposeful deliberations in the seminar and look forward to reading the seminar report.
Social Justice, Constitution and the Supreme Court Thank you for inviting me to a conclave of lawyers on a subject very much in their domain but of relevance to every citizen.
The makers of our Constitution were well aware of the glaring social inequalities that existed in Indian society.
They understood the need to provide a form of justice which could fulfill the expectations of the freedom movement.
According to Granville Austin, the Indian Constitution is, first and foremost, a social document.
The judiciary is the guardian of the Constitution.
Its role as the protector of civil rights has reposed the faith of the people in it.
The Supreme Court has given a dynamic shape to the concept of social justice.
In Calcutta Electrical Construction Company Ltd, v. S.C. Bose5, the Supreme Court held that the right to social and economic justice is ‘a fundamental right’.
Social justice, equality and dignity of person are cornerstones of social democracy.
The concept 'social justice' which the Constitution of India engrafted, consists of diverse principles essential for the orderly growth and development of personality of every citizen.
Social justice is a dynamic device to mitigate the sufferings of the poor, weak, Dalits, Tribals and deprived sections of the society and to elevate them to the level of equality to live a life with dignity of person.
In Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India11, the Court, while decrying the practice of bonded labour, held that Right to life, under Article 21, means right to live with dignity.
One of the more illustrative sectors where the judiciary has given practical shape to social justice is in the progressive interpretation of the Constitutional provisions in allowing affirmative governmental actions.
In Indra Shahani vs. Union of India15 it declared 27 per cent reservation legal for socially and economically backward classes of the society under central services.
At the same time, the Court also tried to achieve a reasonable balance between distribution of benefits and distributive justice.
The Supreme Court has expanded the concept of justice in the economic domain, making it an instrument of removal of socio- economic disparities and inequalities.
Yet, the best intentioned judicial intervention and activism on social issues has its own limits.
In December 2014, then Chief Justice of the Supreme Court constituted a special, two-judge ‘social justice bench’ to hear cases concerning socially marginalized groups.
These are- Dalits; Adivasis; OBCs; Cultural minorities – both religious and linguistic; Women; refugees-foreigners-outsiders; people from North-East India; the poor; and the disabled.
Being limited to an examination of the litigation and judicial activity is one aspect of the matter.
I am happy to be here today to participate in this conference.
Over the years I have had many an occasion to attend conferences and seminars pertaining to the subject of energy.
The default, perhaps, can be attributed to our lack of sufficient awareness of this form of energy.
Even the Kirit Parikh Report of August 2006 on Integrated Energy Policy did not seem to dwell on the matter.
The subject of energy is compelling, even fascinating.
It is a recorded fact of history that all civilizations depended for survival and prosperity on their ability to access energy in sufficient quantities in the form of food and fuel.
The advancement of the past two centuries highlights this truism.
Many years back the Russian astrophysicist Nicolai Kardashev propounded his theory about stages of civilizations based on their access to three energy sources.
He categorized the latter as planetary, stellar and galactic.
Exploiting geothermal energy is not new to humankind.
Ancient Romans built elaborate complexes in areas where they came across hot water springs.
In our own country, hot water springs were traditionally used for religious and medicinal baths.
It is universally accepted that per capita energy consumption in a society is a critical element in its development indices.
India lags far behind on this count.
Our consumption per head is less than a third of the global average.
Almost half of all Indian households do not have access to electricity and our average annual per capita consumption of electricity is merely about 30 percent of the world’s average.
This, then, is a measure of the distance to be covered if the pace of development is to be accelerated.
Our reliance on fossil fuels and traditional bio-mass adds a complicating dimension to the situation.
A projection of requirements two decades hence indicates that even at present levels of consumption, our annual import of oil would go up to 750 million tons and of coal to 1300 million tons.
Ladies and Gentlemen Among the various new and renewable energy options, geothermal energy is recognized as the cleanest, without smoke or environmental hazards.
India has several geothermal provinces characterized by high heat flow and thermal gradients.
Subsequent to the oil crisis of the 1970s, the Geological Survey of India generated data of resource assessment for over 300 hot springs in the country.
Subsequently detailed geological, geophysical and tectonic studies on several thermal provinces, geochemical characteristics of the thermal discharges and reservoir temperature estimations were carried out by the National Geophysical Research Institute and the IITs, especially at Puga valley in Ladakh and Tatapani in Chhattisgarh.
Though India has been one of the earliest countries to begin geothermal projects way back in the 1970s, geothermal energy has not emerged as a significant renewable energy option in the country.
The preference, instead, is for wind energy and solar energy presumably on account of their easy availability, lower initial investment and proven technology.
It is estimated that there is a technical potential to produce about 10 thousand megawatts of geothermal power in the country.
In this context, the experience of some of the Asian countries holds great relevance in developing geothermal energy, overcoming deployment challenges and technical and non-economic barriers.
Geothermal energy accounts for 21 per cent of total primary energy supply in Philippines and 3 per cent in the case of Indonesia.
In terms of contribution to electricity generation, geothermal energy constitutes 17 per cent in Philippines and 5 per cent in the case of Indonesia.
The country also has set a 5 per cent target for geothermal energy for its energy mix for 2025.
The Philippine Energy Plan has articulated a goal for Philippines to become the world leader in geothermal energy.
These efforts have led to the evolution of a stable and integrated policy framework to attract investments and private sector participation.
Second, their policy framework supports renewable energy targets through financial incentives and non-economic support structures.
These include feed-in-tariffs where utilities pay a premium for electricity from renewable energy sources that is delivered to the electric grid.
Last year, the Indonesian government announced setting of a higher price for electricity produced by new geothermal power plants.
The Philippines has also established the National Renewable Energy Board tasked with studying the feed-in-tariff for renewable energy.
Both countries also grant income tax and value added tax incentives for geo-thermal projects and exempt geo-thermal exploration equipment from import duties.
Third, the governments in both countries have made significant efforts in removing economic and non-economic barriers.
Ladies and Gentlemen The Himayalan region is one of the most promising geothermal areas.
It contains about 100 thermal springs and falls in one of the most tectonically active zones.
In the 1980s, the first pilot binary 5 kilo watt power plant was successfully operated by the Geological Survey of India at Manikaran in Himachal Pradesh which proved the power producing capability there.
The Puga Valley geo-thermal field in Jammu and Kashmir has been estimated to have a temperature of 240 degree centigrade at a depth of 2000 meters.
This makes evident its potential and I am confident that this conference would debate ways and means of involving all stakeholders to make this the first viable and operational geo-thermal power plant.
I thank Prof. Varun Sahni for inviting me to inaugurate this international conference and wish your deliberations all success.
I feel privileged to participate in today’s programme at Wardha.
This city has been witness to momentous and historic events during the freedom struggle and has thereafter become a place of pilgrimage for those upholding Gandhian values of service, sacrifice and compassion.
This is my first visit to the city and I am privileged to be here to give away the International Gandhi Awards.
The recipients of the awards this year, Dr. Vijay Kumar Pannikar and the Vidarbha Maharogi Seva Mandal represented by its President Dr. Motilal Rathi, deserve our appreciation for their untiring efforts over many decades for the cause of leprosy elimination and for their service to leprosy affected persons.
On behalf of the International Gandhi Award Committee, and on my own behalf, I extend my congratulations to the awardees and urge them to continue their good work.
But with little information about the disease and about modes of treatment until the 1950s, it remained a mystery for humans.
Medical ignorance did not, however, prevent social stigma.
Mahatma Gandhi had a special concern for leprosy patients, even at a time when there was no specific cure for leprosy.
He understood that there are two aspects of the disease – first, the medical dimension and secondly, the social dimension.
He worked to end the social stigma associated with the disease and to bring about the reintegration of leprosy patients in the mainstream of society.
By the end of 2005, India had achieved the goal of eliminating leprosy as a public health problem at the national level.
Still, it is important to remember that we have not eradicated the disease.
The states of Bihar and Chhattisgarh and the Union Territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli have a prevalence rate of over 1 per ten thousand population and are yet to achieve elimination.
They constitute over 10 per cent of the country’s population and contribute around one-fifth of the recorded case load in the country.
It is important that the national effort to eliminate the disease continues and is more geographically focused on these areas.
We still face daunting challenges in the post-elimination era of leprosy.
India still accounts for over half of new cases of leprosy recorded worldwide.
It is estimated that there are around one million leprosy patients with disabilities in the country.
Ladies and Gentlemen For Bapuji, his life was his message.
I once again congratulate Dr. Vijay Kumar Pannikar and the Vidarbha Maharogi Seva Mandal and its President Dr. Motilal Rathi.
As an architect of development planning in the nascent republic, he had guided the evolution of statistical studies as an important instrumentality for policy planning and implementation.
He was also a great builder of institutions through which he laid the foundation for promoting teaching and research in statistics and for developing the official statistical system in the country as the first Statistical Adviser to the Union Cabinet.
It is befitting that we celebrate the Statistics Day in honour of the memory of Professor Mahalanobis.
I also congratulate Professor Aloke Dey who has been conferred the National Award in Statistics that had been instituted in honour of Professor P. V. Sukhatme.
It is a subject on the Concurrent List, and in keeping with the emphasis on decentralization, the statistical system brings together the Central and State governments in the collection and generation of data.
The government is also in the process of implementing the various recommendations of the Commission.
Ladies and Gentlemen It is also very appropriate that Statistics Day 2010 has the theme of ‘Child Statistics’.
India is home to one-fifth of the world’s children.
Around 440 million people in the country are children and they constitute 42 per cent of our population.
These young citizens of the country constitute a potential demographic resource that could propel the nation to higher orbits of economic progress and human development.
Realising the potential, however, is neither a given nor automatic.
The reality is in stark contrast.
We have recently enacted legislation to operationalise the Fundamental Right to Education for our children aged 6 to 14 years.
Our accession to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child imposes additional obligations and commitments.
The National Policy for Children 1974 had declared children as a ‘supreme national asset’.
The commitment to make children a priority of our development agenda thus exists.
It is here that systematic compilation of comprehensive statistical information on children can guide our policy makers and planners engaged in bettering the situation of our children.
I congratulate the Chief Statistician of India for setting up this Forum and hope that it would foster coordination and collaboration and improve the credibility and transparency in the collection and reporting of statistical data on our children and the families they come from.
Ladies and Gentlemen While policy makers and national leaders have always appreciated the contribution of our statisticians, their public profile has declined since the time of Prof. Mahalanobis and other great statisticians of his ilk.
We must also encourage our youth to choose statistics as an academic pursuit and as a profession.
I thank Sriprakash Jaiswal ji for inviting me to inaugurate this function.
Add to these Hyderabad’s own cosmopolitan essence.
The founder of the city in the sixteenth century decreed that it should be ‘a replica of paradise itself’.
Few down the ages disagreed with the outcome.
Diamonds from nearby mines gave it fame and centrality and textiles commercial significance.
It spawned a charmingly rich language and a composite culture.
A Qutb Shahi poet summed up its place in the world: Dakan hai angina, angoothi hai jag.
None would have then realised that the closing years of the 20th century would make the city a Koh-i-noor in terms of modern science and technology.
It speaks volumes for Hyderabad’s genius for accommodation and change while holding on to the thread of excellence.
The University of Hyderabad, occupying the first position in a recent ranking of Indian universities, is itself a good example.
II Convocations are occasions to honour intellectual achievement.
The pursuit of knowledge, however, is not subject to formal barriers and inquiry in any of its branches does not end with the acquisition of a university decree.
The mind trained to think logically and critically does not cease to function.
This often brings it face to face with reality at variance with tradition and to which it feels compelled to respond.
It is here that the two worlds, within the academia and beyond it, come together.
The reality, however, was somewhat less prosaic and not devoid of a carefully crafted umbilical cord to society and its spokes-persons.
It was also subject to change.
Today it is candidly accepted that teaching and research in a university, and the advances in knowledge it produces, should in considerable measure be related to the changing needs and demands of society.
The centrality of social purpose thus stands underlined.
The really teasing question pertains to its ambit.
He urges the need to speak publicly and with imagination about complex things, and challenge orthodoxy with correctives.
There is nothing altogether novel about any of Chan’s five principles; yet, taken together, they do offer a road map for action.
Some of you would, as I would, like to explore this further.
Both are inextricably linked to, and influenced by our perception of the human character and of the world we live in.
It unavoidably influences the shaping of the future.
Let us consider the latter.
The term human has a certain connotation.
A random perusal of the dictionary suggests a number of associated terms: humane, humaneness, humanism, humanitarian, humanitarianism, humanity, humanize, humankind, and humanly.
It becomes clearer when put alongside its antonym which suggests its negation or opposite.
He then defined a good citizen as one who should know ‘how to govern like a free man and how to obey like a free man’.
He or she should, as a later philosopher put it, appreciate both the necessity and the moral imperative of being free.
These attributes of citizenship were refined down the ages.
A famous example is the Funeral Oration of Pericles, recorded for posterity by the historian Thucydides.
The raja-praja concept that has such an established place in our daily vocabulary is a relic of an earlier era and has no basis in today’s legal structure.
It is essential to remember that the modern democratic state has specified the citizen’s charter of rights; it also dwells on the duties of citizenship.
We do not have to look for instances because we ourselves are the model.
The Constitution of India is one of the best examples of a constitution that blends the rights and duties of citizenship harmoniously.
In terms of sheer numbers and scale, the extent of human freedom and liberation that was granted was unprecedented in human history.
It has stood the test of time and has been widely acclaimed.
III The charter of rights of citizens is spelt out in the Constitution of India in the chapter relating to fundamental rights.
These pertain to six broad categories: the right to equality, right to freedom, right against exploitation, right to freedom of religion, cultural and educational rights, and right to seek constitutional remedies.
The text is underscored by an overarching framework of constitutional morality.
This approach has been accepted by the courts of law.
You would note that Article 51A of our Constitution contains a set of eleven duties of citizens described as fundamental.
These pertain to the promotion of harmony and spirit of common brotherhood, development of a scientific temper, humanism and spirit of inquiry and reform, and striving for excellence in all levels of individual and collective activity.
These have to be read with the requirements of justice and fraternity so clearly enunciated in the Preamble of the Constitution.
I dwell on this because you, the highly educated among our citizens, bear a special responsibility in this regard.
It has been observed by an eminent public figure that we are today ‘desperately groping for a political culture based on integrity’.
One obvious reason for this is the dilution of system of values at the individual and collective levels.
Views to the contrary are also around.
The first is reflective of anguish, the second of smugness.
Here again, as in the case of the conceptual framework of humanity, the ambit and implications of terms like integrity and possible have to be clearly understood.
Integrity stands for moral excellence and honesty; its absence would suggest immorality and dishonesty.
In the same way, a term like ‘possible’ leaves open a range of possibilities including the acceptance of the immoral and the dishonest.
Many decades back Gandhiji had identified Seven Social Sins.
They are inscribed on a tablet near his Samadhi at Rajghat.
This identification is essential but not sufficient.
Together they reveal a disturbing pattern of departures from norms of integrity.
The need for correctives is thus evident.
The first is essential and obligatory; the second is desirable and necessary; the third would set us upon the path of full realisation of our potential as a society.
There is, of course, a fourth – unmentionable - category of those who flout rules, evade responsibilities, and disgrace by their behaviour the civic community to which they belong.
A mature society would ostracise them, a less mature one would endure the burden while seeking a corrective.
The commitment of a society and polity to educating, grooming and nurturing its citizens, eventually manifests itself in the latter’s approach to civic participation, standards of personal responsibility and adherence to constitutional morality.
Thus a substantive contribution to the shaping of citizens can be made and educational institutions, including those of higher learning, can play a major role in this national effort.
One other aspect of the matter bears scrutiny.
Technology and globalisation have ensured that isolation is no longer an option and that we have to live in the world and with the world.
This necessitates an acceptance of global standards, rules, and norms of behaviour but without sacrificing our identity and values.
Pluralism and accommodation of diversity is a characteristic of our societal reality.
This model is of wider relevance in an era that seeks to define the contours of a 21st century citizen who would have a national as well as a transnational identity.
The foregoing considerations help us to recapitulate the three of the eleven aspects of Article 51A and assess their relevance.
To promote and attain these is among the principal duties of citizens and this is to be undertaken proactively rather than passively, with a spirit of seeking justice and achieving fraternity.
Every individual has an ideal, and an idiom for expressing it.
This would be true of each of you.
I wish them happiness in personal life and success in professional pursuits.
I urge them to remember at all times that they are citizens of this country and, by virtue of that, claimants of rights and obligated to discharge duties.
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a great pleasure for me to be in the beautiful historic city of Dubrovnik.
I am confident that the friendly bilateral relations between our two countries would grow further for the mutual benefit of the peoples of our two countries.
Excellency  Dubrovnik has been an active trading centre throughout history and has produced many explorers, merchants, bankers and mariners of repute.
The fact that Dubrovnik attracts millions of tourists every year from all over the world is testimony to the glory of Dubrovnik's past and the friendliness of its residents.
The city of Dubrovnik is in my thoughts at work, as a beautiful painting of the city adorns my Chamber in the Indian Parliament.
I am also happy to learn that despite its distance, Dubrovnik has left its imprint on India.
They also constructed a church in the village of Gandaulim, replicating the church of St. Blaise or Sao Braz, the Patron Saint of Dubrovnik.
It is said that the church bell was brought from Dubrovnik.
In recent times, we have had high level interaction between our countries and former President of India Mr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan visited Dubrovnik in 1965.
I am happy to maintain this important and historical link between Dubrovnik and India.
I take this opportunity to once again thank Your Excellency and the friendly residents of Dubrovnik for your hospitality today and extend my best wishes for your good health and success.
We are delighted to be in Croatia, renowned as much for its beauty as for its contribution to art, literature and culture.
Excellency Relations between India and Croatia have been friendly since the days of the former Yugoslavia when our leaders, Jawaharlal Nehru and President Josip Tito, along with others established the Non Aligned Movement.
It is a concept that is extremely relevant in the multi-polar scenario that is emerging today.
He was a versatile scholar who travelled widely in the Malabar region and met all sections of society, from fishermen to the Kings of Travancore.
He published several books and papers on Indian culture, ranging from Sanskrit grammar to Indian botany.
I am happy to note that the Centre for Indology at University of Zagreb is encouraging such studies actively.
Excellency I am privileged to witness the rapid progress made by Croatia in recent years as it is engaged with the European Union, with which India has a strategic partnership.
There are many opportunities for us to enlarge our engagement as we noted during our discussions.
Our management of the economy over past two years helped us to minimise the effect of the unprecedented global financial crisis on our growth momentum.
In the current financial year 2010-11, the economy is expected to grow at 8.5 per cent.
It is my earnest hope that our two countries would forge a meaningful and mutually beneficial partnership in the coming years based on our respective strengths and capabilities.
Excellency The challenges of today defy borders.
Recent incidents of terrorism in India and other countries serve as a grim reminder that the scourge of terrorism is disruptive of all civilized life.
It knows no boundaries and seriously threatens international peace and security.
We must continue and reinvigorate our collective efforts to strengthen international cooperation to eradicate terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Swift and credible steps must be taken to eliminate terrorist safe havens.
My wife and I and my entire delegation are delighted to be in your beautiful and renowned city, so rich in culture and tradition.
We in India have great admiration for the Czech Republic and its capital city in particular.
We admire its history, cultural heritage and its accomplishments in all the fields of human knowledge.
Prague lies at the intersection of Europe.
Czech Republic and India have historically been close partners in our quest for equality, human rights, freedom and democracy.
The leaders of India’s freedom struggle, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose, visited your beautiful city in the 1930s.
Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore visited Prague in the 1920s.
Both Pandit Nehru, as well as Tagore, raised their voices against Czechoslovakia’s occupation.
I thank you very much for this honour that you have extended to me and my delegation and through us to the people of India.
Excellency Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen I am delighted to be here today.
Our relations go back to the period before our Independence.
Tagore, our national poet, came here twice in 1921 and 1926 and the translation of his works into Czech had nurtured a close cultural and historical link with India.
Jawaharlal Nehru visited your country in 1938 at a critical juncture in your history in an act of solidarity with the Czech government in their resistance to Hitler.
He wrote about this visit in his newspaper.
Prague has been the intellectual centre of Europe.
You also have a rich cultural tradition.
This has made your capital an important centre for globally significant events.
Czech engineers have contributed to India's industrialization and BATA, Yezdi and Skoda are well known brand names in India.
Our countries are bound by our commitment to democratic and parliamentary governance, human rights and our tradition of pluralism.
My delegation includes Members of Indian Parliament representing different political parties.
They represent the diversity as well as the unity of India.
We have attempted inclusive economic growth within the framework of a Parliamentary democracy, so that all sections and groups have a stake in the growing prosperity of the nation.
We believe that there is an ideal synergy between Czech technology and India's growing market.
There is also scope for cooperation between our universities and cultural institutions.
Some Aspects of Global Governance in the 21st Century I claim to be resident of a city of considerable antiquity.
It is one of eight cities built successively on the same stretch of land on the banks of a river.
I, therefore, cannot but be fascinated by another city of ancient vintage.
Legend has it that the founding deity of Prague visualised 'a large town whose glory shall reach the stars'.
The beauty and architectural splendour I see here testify to this prophesy.
Geography and history have bestowed on Prague a centrality that is evident.
It has for centuries witnessed ideological and political contestations in central Europe and is today an active participant in the making of a new Europe.
I thank the Institute for inviting me to address this distinguished gathering today.
Ladies and gentlemen Ours is an era of great change - political, economic and technological.
Humankind has benefited from it, though in unequal measure.
Some live in affluence and prosperity unmatched in history; others are less fortunate.
The levels of disparity between peoples, nations and societies are starker than ever before.
The impact of change is pervasive.
Concepts, values and systems are in flux.
The sanctity of the Westphalian Order of State sovereignty has been dented by international covenants and practices.
Globalisation has accelerated it by the imperatives of what the historian Philip Bobbitt has called the 'Market State'; technology has added to it.
Many in this audience would recall that in 1992 Vaclav Havel had called for a redefinition of modernity.
Ladies and gentlemen Governance has been a subject of debate since the advent of civilisation.
Greek philosophers dwelt on it.
In the 4th century BC, the Indian strategic thinker and administrator Kautilya maintained that the objective of governance was "the happiness and welfare" of the subjects of a state: 'in the happiness of his subjects lies his happiness; in their welfare his welfare'.
These objectives include eradication of poverty, mitigation of conflict, achieving minimum standards of health and education, environmental sustainability, upholding human rights and addressing the problem of hunger.
Good governance is about leadership, sensitivity to the concerns of others, and upholding of basic norms of equity, justice and fairness.
The dimensions of the problem, and the complexity of the task, unavoidably bring forth disjuncture and challenges.
Allow me to mention a few of these.
We know, in the first place, that while the primacy of nation-states has not ended, their absolute control over their territory and their citizens has been partly ceded to trans-national, multilateral, global and regional institutions and mechanisms.
Secondly, governance at the global and national levels confronts the old dilemma of a choice between normative standards and realpolitik.
The unacceptability of a chauvinistic concept of the nation-state must go hand in hand with a similar undesirability of an unequal global order.
The latter is most evident in the institutional inadequacy of the global political and financial institutions.
A sustainable argument for global governance cannot overlook David Held's observation that 'a theory of legitimate power is inescapably a theory of democracy in the interlocking processes and structures of the global system.
It is a theory of the democratic state within the global order and the theory of the impact of the global order on the democratic state'.
A third reality to be registered is the state of flux characterising the contemporary world order.
Affiliations and identities are no longer exclusive, and overlapping multiplicity has become a necessity rather than an option.
Alongside, globalization and homogenization have had an adverse impact on cultural distinctiveness of peoples and nations.
The articulation of who a people are, and what the quintessential values of their culture and civilization are, is a more difficult process today.
Some are old, strong and cross-cutting alliances, while others are recent loose groupings focused on limited themes.
The future evolution of this process has important consequences for all of us.
Ladies and gentlemen  Even when there is a convergence of views and recipes, the experience of individual societies remains critical to correctives.
It is in this context that I wish to speak of my country.
India is one-sixth of the world in terms of population, is a vibrant democracy and is a microcosm of the diversities that characterise our world.
It has been rightly called 'the largest multicultural society in the world.'
I wish to highlight three aspects of our experience for your consideration.
First, and the most important, is the accommodation of diversity and acceptance of multiple identities.
We have been fortunate in implementing it due to our civilisational heritage and innate capacity for synthesis.
Accommodation of diversity has thus been consciously incorporated as a distinctive feature of the Indian state.
It implies that a standardized image of an Indian cannot be constructed.
Second, rapid economic and human development has raised new issues of identity and integration.
Living in isolation is not an option in the era of globalisation; there are, however, many ways of living together.
Integration is necessary and desirable; assimilation is neither desirable nor practical.
Throughout our history, we have seen identities being built on a series of inclusions and exclusions reflective of ground realities.
The challenge for us in the future, as in the past, would be to maintain a balance in favour of inclusions.
Our peoples and leaders are committed to peace, freedom and justice for all.
Our mutual cooperation and our role in the various regional and global groupings would substantially contribute to better profiles of global governance in this century.
The reference, of course, is to the overlapping, even interlinked, economic and financial, security, and environmental threats that have emerged so sharply in the past year or so.
They are interlinked and impact the capacity of players on the global stage.
I thank the Director of the Prague Security Studies Institute Mr. Oldrich Cerny and Deputy Foreign Minister Mr. Hynek Kmonicek for their kind words.
It implies that men hold power in all important institutions of society and that women are deprived of access to such power.
It is a process as well as a product.
Attempts have been made in different ages to sanctify them or put forth benign interpretations.
A 20th century reaction to it was symbolized by Ambedkar’s gesture of burning the text of Manusmriti publicly in 1927.
The intersections of caste, class and gender worsen the situation.
Despite its social construction, patriarchal culture, reinforced by the major religions in the country, maintains its stranglehold on gender inequality.
They must be holistic rather than piece-meal and include measures to address overall health needs including sexual and reproductive health, literacy, education,, safety and violence free spaces, fulfillment of aspirations for personal and political growth, and economic empowerment.
No suggestions appear to have been made as to how ‘the culture of institutions’ has to be made and how social practices, supposedly based on culture and traditions, in different segments of the wider community is to be initiated.
A question on the Report in the Rajya Sabha on March 3, 2016 was answered by the Minister for Women and Child Welfare.
Two questions on the National Policy for Empowerment of Women 2001 were also answered in Lok Sabha on February 2 and November 18, 2016.
It will require ‘a review of the personal and customary law in accordance with the Constitutional provisions’ to ‘enable equitable and inclusive and just entitlement for women.
Also, that specific, achievable and effective strategies for implementation will be required at national, state and local government levels, and in PSUs, corporates, businesses, trade unions, NGOs and community based organizations.
The reader is thus left in the dark about areas of convergence or otherwise.
The first refers to the presence and prevalence of patriarchy, the second alludes to it elliptically.
The emphasis on empowerment is indicative of the incremental approach, of equity rather than equality.
The conclusion then is unavoidable that the process of dismantling patriarchy may have been initiated but is yet to deliver a finished product.
The challenge of moving from the former to the latter is thus imperative.
Without it, questions would remain on the sustainability of gender equality.Jai Hind
Thank you for your warm words of welcome and your gracious hospitality.
As I stand here I am reminded of the ties which bind our two countries.
These are based not only on our commitments to the values and principles of democratic and parliamentary governance but are rooted in our civilisational legacy, linguistic affinity and contact between men of letters.
Our great poet Rabindranath Tagore visited Prague in 1921, and again in 1926, at the invitation of his friend Professor Lesny, the celebrated Czech Indologist who had translated his poems and novels.
Jawaharlal Nehru visited Prague in 1938, accompanied by his daughter Indira.
My delegation includes members of the Indian parliament representing different political parties.
Exchanges between our parliaments reinforce the growing multi-faceted relations between our countries.
Your Excellency’s visit to India in December 2007 was instrumental in consolidating our cooperation.
The challenge before us in India is to attain and sustain rapid and inclusive economic growth within the framework of parliamentary democracy.
Our management of the economy over past two years helped us to minimise the effect of the unprecedented global financial crisis on our growth momentum.
We believe that there exists an ideal synergy between India’s growing market and Czech technology.
There is already bilateral trade and investment in sectors as diverse as software, pharmaceuticals, infrastructure, textiles and engineering goods.
The meeting in New Delhi last month, between industrial users and R&D organizations of our two countries, points to further areas of mutually beneficial cooperation.
The challenges of today defy borders.
Recent incidents of terrorism in India and other countries serve as a grim reminder that the scourge of terrorism is disruptive of all civilized life.
It knows no boundaries and seriously threatens international peace and security.
We must continue and reinvigorate our collective efforts to strengthen international cooperation to eradicate terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Swift and credible steps must be taken to eliminate terrorist safe havens.
We have opportunities to further intensify cooperation between our two countries.
We are also working together in the context of the broader India-EU strategic partnership.
Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen, Please join me in a toast to:
In Indian politics, he is probably one of the few remaining statesmen who have successfully synergised their literary talent, political vision and social activism with great dexterity.
His literary and political legacy is a tribute to his personal commitment towards the Tamil people, their culture and their language.
Dr. Karunanidhi’s writings reflect the political tradition of Periyar E. V. Ramasami and Arignar Anna and the literary tradition of Bharathiar.
His lack of formal college education did not prevent him from mastering ancient Tamil writings and in evolving a unique contemporary Dravidian literary idiom.
He has also successfully used journalism, cinema, theatre and public speaking to propound his political vision.
The great Tamil poet Subramania Bharati wrote:  “It is no triumph to recite our ancient stories secretly among ourselves; Our poetry will be truly glorious only when men pay homage in foreign lands.”  This is even more applicable for our contemporary stories and poetry in Tamil and other Indian languages.
The richness of the literary tradition in our various languages would go unappreciated within the country, and in the world at large, without proficient translation of these literary works.
It is recognized that Dr. Karunanidhi came into his own as a literary giant through his contribution to dramatic literature in Tamil, many of which were written originally for cinematic productions.
It is said that all expression of Dr. Karunanidhi is poetic, with even his prose containing immense poetic diction.
In his poetry, his remarkable command over Tamil language comes to the fore.
Translators have often remarked that the real challenge of translating his poems begins with the titles!
Dr. Karunanidhi’s grasp of linguistic and literary theories emerges in “The Flower-garden of Tolkappiyam”.
I once again congratulate Bharathiar University for their initiative in publishing the English translations of the literary works of Dr. Karunanidhi.
I wish Dr. Kalaignar M. Karunanidhi many more years of service to the nation, the Tamil people, Tamil culture and Tamil language.
Nandri Vanakkam
It gives me great pleasure to be present here today on this memorable occasion to witness Commander Dilip Donde completing the first solo circumnavigation of the globe by an Indian, in an Indian-built yacht.
The achievement of Commander Donde serves as a demonstration of courage, determination and skill.
It is also an acknowledgement of the important role played by the Indian Navy in planning and overseeing the circumnavigation, with all its attendant multi-dimensional complexities.
The nation appreciates the crucial role of the Indian Navy in safeguarding our maritime frontiers and monitoring the international shipping lanes that are vital for our economic well-being.
The Indian Navy has also propagated the spirit of adventure amongst the youth.
My best wishes, and that of the nation, for many more such achievements in the future.
Jai Hind.
I am delighted to be here today to inaugurate the Diamond Jubilee Celebrations of the National Academy of Audit and Accounts.
The surroundings are idyllic.
‘Yarrows’, said to have been so named by a very homesick Scotsman, is a national ‘heritage’ institution with a long and distinguished history.
The same is true of the Audit Department that has an illustrious history of over 150 years.
As one of the oldest training facilities for the civil servants in the country, the Academy has made a significant contribution to practices of good governance in the country.
It has also emerged as an institution of excellence in public auditing and accounting in the global arena.
These perceptions are reflected in Articles 148 to 151 of our Constitution.
The status and functions of the Comptroller & Auditor General were amplified in the C&AG’s Act of 1971.
The objective of Public Audit in our country has evolved from ‘Regularity Audit’ focused on probity, legality, propriety and compliance in public spending, to ‘Performance Audit’ that emphasizes programme results and ultimate outcomes.
This transformation also means that the C&AG now has to focus on risk analysis and containment, forecasting emerging trends and facilitating good governance.
Besides audit, another important function of the C&AG is compiling and submission of accounts.
Friends Amidst a fast changing national and global economic landscape, Government Accounting has remained relatively static in the last fifty years.
The Government still follows cash basis of accounting and the financial reporting framework is based on book keeping rules rather than fundamental accounting principles.
It has not proved to be an accurate or effective instrumentality to focus on performance accountability.
Some years back the Government accepted the recommendation of the Twelfth Finance Commission to migrate to accrual based accounting.
The first step in preparing a detailed road map for this and in formally formulating the Government Accounting Standards for the country was taken in 2002 with the formation of the Government Accounting Standards Advisory Board.
The suggested Accounting and Financial Reporting Standards on various themes are under the consideration of the Government and are yet to be notified.
The migration process is expected to take at least another ten years.
There has been a gradual evolution of the role of government from direct provision of economic goods and services and tight control of private enterprise, to broad regulation of economic sectors, promotion and facilitation of private enterprise and fair competition.
Government funds are increasingly devolving through urban and rural local bodies, Special Purpose Vehicles, Non-Governmental Organisations and Public Private Partnerships.
Effective use of public audit as an aid in enhancing governance and improving accountability demands that we seriously consider six key issues.
First, there has been an exponential growth in regulatory agencies in economic and social sectors tasked with ensuring coordinated development, fair competition and trade practices, minimum standards of operation and customer service and fair use of scarce public resources.
Second, the existing provisions of the 1971 Act are restrictive regarding audit of public funds spent by NGOs, autonomous organisations, societies and trusts etc.
The situation in State Legislative Assemblies is also similar.
Regrettably, this weakens parliamentary financial control and ability to enforce accountability of the Executive to the Legislature.
Ladies and Gentlemen The Public Auditors have played an important role in the development of our nation by their oversight of public accounts and expenditure and providing sound advice and assistance to the Legislature and the Executive in fulfilling their mandated functions.
The National Academy of Audit and accounts deserves the nation’s appreciation for transforming young civil servants to Professional Auditors.
I once again congratulate the Academy’s faculty and trainees and the entire Audit Department and thank Shri Vinod Rai for inviting me to inaugurate the Diamond Jubilee Celebrations.
I also take this opportunity to heartily congratulate all the awardees and their families on this occasion and place on record the deep appreciation of the nation for their hard work and professional commitment to their patients and to public healthcare.
As a developing country with a population of over 1 billion, we face enormous socio-economic challenges; the challenges are even more complex in the realm of human development.
Nursing is critical to putting in place an efficient, affordable and comprehensive healthcare system and ensuring healthcare delivery in an equitable manner.
The theme for this year’s International Nurses Day – Delivering Quality, Serving Communities: Nurses Leading Chronic Care – is appropriate as there is a massive increase in death and disability resulting from chronic disease.
Unlike popular perception that chronic diseases are a developed country problem, 80 per cent of deaths world wide due to chronic diseases occur in low and middle income countries.
India bears a huge burden of the global case load of chronic diseases.
For example, out of the 246 million people globally suffering from diabetes, India has the largest number of 41 million people with diabetes.
The situation in the case of cardiovascular diseases, cancer and chronic respiratory diseases is broadly similar.
These diseases are preventable and cause a huge loss to the national economies, communities and families.
Nursing personnel must understand the magnitude of this health challenge and take coordinated action to promote healthy lifestyles, prevent disease and provide health care to those in need.
I urge each one of you to heed this call.
Ladies and Gentlemen The immense shortage in nursing personnel is a significant impediment in achieving our public healthcare objectives.
India has only 8 nurses per ten thousand population in comparison to Sri Lanka which has 14, Indonesia which has 13, Thailand at 37 and Maldives at 33.
It is also estimated that of the 10.35 lakh registered nurses, active nurses pursuing the profession in the country are only around four lakhs.
It is also anomalous that there are more doctors than nurses in the country and for every 3 doctors there are 2 nurses.
In comparison, in most developed countries, there are three nurses per doctor.
There are also significant regional disparities in the location of nursing educational institutions and availability of nursing personnel in the country.
Over 60 per cent of the nursing educational institutions are in Southern and Western India whereas the greatest shortfall of nursing personnel is in the high focus states in Northern and Eastern India.
The government remains committed to enhance resources for health care and bring about reforms and convergence in service delivery.
It is they who are the face of our public health services in the vast reaches of rural India and provide vital maternal and child care health services to the community.
I once again congratulate the winners of the awards today for being role models in their communities and societies.
I thank Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad Saheb for inviting me to this function today.
I am happy to be here today to join you in commemorating the Golden Jubilee of the National Defence College.
Through five decades of sustained work the College has earned reputation and respect amongst its peers in the world.
The meaning and content of these concepts has evolved with time and human progress.
Security today is viewed as human security.
War too now has a meaning that transcends the one given to it in textbooks of strategy or international law.
Concepts like interpolarity, hybrid wars and networked adversaries have acquired relevance and are re-shaping strategies and tactics.
The collective impact of these perceptions dilutes the traditional paradigm and induces a comprehensive review of concepts and practices.
Such an approach excludes compartmentalized thinking.
The challenge for the strategist therefore is to think beyond the obvious, visualize the improbable perhaps even the impossible.
Each of these would necessitate inter-agency planning and implementation.
Here lies the relevance of institutions like the NDC where a pooling of knowledge and experience is intended to shed new light on questions of comprehensive security and to bring forth policy options.
Equally important are the “higher direction” aspects of the Course and the question of management and leadership.
These are critical to success in any organization.
The dimensions of human security were spelt out by the UNDP many years back.
More recently, the India Social Development Report 2005 used six indices to make an India-specific assessment.
Correctives to some of these lie in the domestic sphere while some others are of a regional or global nature and can only be addressed through wider cooperation.
The state, as Professor Barry Buzan has observed, “is less important in the new security agenda than the old one.
Heightened awareness has helped.
The trends are clear even if the pace is uneven.
The technological changes and quicker communication and transportation have become force multipliers to such non-state actors.
This gives rise to doctrines on intervention.
Recourse to it complicates matters and causes untold hardship to affected societies.
Institutions like the National Defence College contribute to the national effort.
The NDC deserves appreciation for its structured study of dimensions of national security in our increasingly complex global environment.
The officers who have graduated from here have contributed to it in good measure.
The College can be justly proud of its Alumni.
I am confident that the next fifty years of the National Defence College would be equally productive.
I wish the College, its faculty and staff, and all the officers, success in their endeavour and I thank Lt. Gen. Prakash Menon for inviting me to this function.
I congratulate the award winning States for their success in implementation of the Mission and in the progress achieved in making quality health services accessible and affordable to the poorest households in the rural parts of the country.
Regional disparities aggravated it and hampered the implementation of health-related programmes such as sanitation, drinking water, hygiene and nutrition.
This Mission had a unique thrust.
A high-profile International Advisory Panel of experts undertook a mid-term evaluation of the Mission.
Curative healthcare had been the focus of planned efforts for a long time due to the burden of communicable diseases and the necessity to build up health infrastructure in the rural areas.
At the same time and as a nation, we can not afford to accord a lower priority to preventive and promotive healthcare.
Second, human resource management is a critical aspect of the immense scaling up represented by the NRHM.
The Hon’ble Minister of Health and Family Welfare has already announced some innovative measures focused on expanding the pool of available rural health professionals and has unveiled incentives for encouraging other health professionals to work in rural and difficult areas.
With concurrent focus on nursing education and skills upgradation for Accredited Social Health Activists and Aanganwadi workers, the human resource problem can be addressed to a large extent.
Third, the success of any large scale integrated programme would depend on appropriate setting of output and outcome targets.
The performance audit of NRHM conducted by the Comptroller and Auditor General has also recommended prescription of disaggregated state-wise targets in view of the overall national targets set by the Ministry.
Fourth, convergence is a powerful theme in the area of human development and inclusive growth.
Compartmentalisation and specific scheme/programme based approaches would not yield optimum results for the resources expended.
The NRHM seeks an inter-sectoral convergence approach to synergise women and child development, hygiene and sanitation, nutrition, water, public works and Panchayati Raj Institutions.
This is a huge effort and requires the convergence of government and civil society efforts.
Fifth, approaches to public health must look at the different stages of health transition at state and district levels so that appropriate strategies could be adopted.
The district is, and remains, the basic unit for all interventions under the Mission.
The wide variation in the three components of health transition across various districts in India indicates the complexity that needs to be addressed to achieve the goals of NRHM.
We have raised hopes; we have propelled demand: through both of these the citizens seek accessible, affordable, accountable, effective and reliable healthcare in rural areas.
We should not expect forgiveness if we fall short of these aroused expectations.
I once again congratulate all the winners of the award and Hon’ble Minister of Health and Family Welfare for their excellent work.
I wish you all success in your endeavour.
Private Ethics and Public Morality  It gives me a great pleasure to participate in today’s function and deliver the Dr. V. N. Tewari Memorial Lecture.
Dr. Tewari’s contribution to literature and to the work of Parliament would always be remembered.
As an alumnus of Panjab University and a Member of its Senate, he played an important role in strengthening the academic framework and improving the administrative structures in the University.
The devil, as often, is in the manner it is reflected in the norms and practice of governance in its diverse dimensions - legislative, administrative and judicial.
The doctrinal position is thus clear.
The individual functionary, to that extent, has been mechanised and de-personalised, loses personal empathy, and becomes a morally passive citizen.
Third, what is common to public morality and private ethics is a belief that the self and personal interest is not the sole point of reference in assessing public and private actions.
Some of its ingredients can be identified: In the first place, a healthy spirit of optimism about the ability of public service to serve public interest is an essential element of public morality.
It is only when one can see that possibility of public good in the ambiguities and uncertainties of public life and public policy that one can begin to work in that direction.
Secondly, the courage of conviction required to take decisions and sustain them despite opposition is essential for effective political and social action.
Such courage needs to be summoned in simple issues such as refusing favours to friends and family or in momentous decisions of peace and war.
Many instances of this can be found in our recent and earlier history.
In the fourth place, upholding the rule of law is an essential requirement of public morality in a modern democracy.
John Locke’s dictum - “wherever law ends tyranny begins” - has universal validity.
Strict adherence to the law and basic honesty are integral to this element.
The standard of probity must not be the ‘Lowest Common Denominator’ but the ‘Highest Common Principle’.
Fifthly, a sense of empathy and compassion towards human suffering is needed for dealing with moral ambiguities in public policy and to prioritize resources and actions.
Customs and traditions are one aspect of it.
Each one of us has a group identity and custom demands that special consideration be given to the members of the group, be it family, caste or tribe.
These instances can be multiplied and add a nefarious dimension to the conduct of public policy.
The same holds for an atmosphere of permissiveness and its amoral norms of measuring excellence.
In recent years, our public domain has witnessed a debate on the crisis of governance in the country.
The palpable public disenchantment with it has directed the focus of the debate on the ethical dimension of the framework of governance.
This too is reflected in the Report of the Second Administrative Reforms Commission which begins with a candid acknowledgment that governance is the weak link in our quest for prosperity and equity.
It defines integrity as “much more than financial honesty” and addresses the dual facets of institutional and individual corruption.
Moreover, the gains from the implementation of social security programmes, such as the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme and food provision through the Public Distribution System, are being diluted due to mal-administration and corruption.
The above, taken together, unavoidably lead to the conclusion that corruption in public life is today a threat to national security and we have to deal with it accordingly.
We have in place a loosely structured Code of Conduct for the three sets of actors in the public service domain – Civil Service, Legislature and the Judiciary.
Members are also required to declare assets and liabilities and specified pecuniary interests.
Somewhat similar procedures are also in place in the Lok Sabha.
Regarding the Higher Judiciary, judicial ethics have been summarised in the “Restatement of Values of Judicial Life adopted by the Chief Justices’ Conference of India, 1999” and in “The Bangalore Principles of Judicial Conduct, 2002”.
The legal and administrative steps taken so far to improve ethical norms in the executive, the legislature and the judiciary have been felt to be clearly inadequate.
The need for a more purposeful, result oriented, approach is imperative.
This habit has to be cultivated, individually and collectively.
A survey of the Indian scene today suggests that this cultivation of habit is being neglected at every stage, at home, in school, and in the wider public domain.
This has to change, must be changed.
Only then would public morality be reflective of the righteousness that the sages, ancient and modern, talked about.
I thank Manish Tewari ji for inviting me to deliver today’s Memorial Lecture and thank all of you for your patient hearing.
I am delighted to be here today.
My purpose was to caution, not to dissuade.
I am glad he and others associated with the initiative went ahead; today’s gathering is evidence enough of their success.
The need for an association of international studies is self evident; its absence, in fact, invokes questions.
This state of affairs, clearly, is unsatisfactory.
Someone once said that nations, like men, have their infancy.
This can no longer be true of present-day India.
We have had six decades to develop, to mature, and to find our place in the comity of nations.
Each is a function of incisive scholarship in which conceptual frameworks and micro-analysis would lend credence to the national effort.
The need for correctives is thus evident.
In a recent interaction with students of JNU, many students who have specialised in various aspects of international studies remarked that they were unable to find suitable and rewarding employment opportunities.
Realism in international studies is an unavoidable necessity.
Gender in National Discourse - The Road Ahead I am happy to participate in today's ceremony.
His dictum that education was an essential element in empowering the women of India and making them self-reliant and self-confident remains valid to this day.
Maharshi Karve's foresight was complemented by the contribution and support of Sir Vithaldas Thackersey.
The motto of the University - 'Sanskrita Stree Parashakti' - 'An enlightened woman is a source of infinite strength' - has universal validity.
As the first Women's University in India and South Asia, and being endowed with a uniquely national jurisdiction, SNDT has come to represent excellence in higher education for women.
The discourse of course is of older vintage and social scientists have traced its evolution, limitations and nuances.
For our purpose today, and if we take the era of Independence as the point of reference, there is no doubt that the principle of gender equality constitutes a basic feature of the Republic and is enshrined in the Constitution.
The Preamble and the sections on Fundamental Rights, Fundamental Duties and Directive Principles are unambiguously explicit.
These constitutional provisions have been reinforced by the Supreme Court which has held that the equality clause in the Constitution does not speak of mere formal equality before law but embodies the concept of real and substantive equality which is an essential ingredient of social and economic justice.
Legal equality is one, perhaps the easier, aspect of the matter; societal reality is quite another.
It is necessary to delve into the underlying, unstated, sources of the problem.
The census data on declining sex ratio is well known.
Discrimination and disparity begins even before a woman citizen is born.
The saga of missing baby girls in wide swathes of rural and urban India has resulted from the marriage of ancient prejudice with modern technology and rising incomes.
A quarter of pregnant women do not receive pre-natal care and less than half of births are attended by skilled health staff.
There is a high incidence of maternal under-nourishment and of under-nourishment of girls over boys.
Female primary school enrolment rates are lower compared to boys and this is reflected, eventually, in the female literacy rate in the 15-24 age group.
Similarly, the female economic activity is lower and so is female participation in professional and technical work.
In terms of representation in structures of power, and while things have changed qualitatively at the grass root level, the participation of women in political decision-making at middle and higher levels is abysmally low.
Less than 11 percent of the seats in Lok Sabha are held by women.
A recent National Survey of Household Income and Expenditure conducted by the National Council of Applied Economic Research brings forth glaring disparities in the economic sphere.
The conclusion is inescapable that while all citizens are equal, women citizens are clearly less equal than men.
The basic design of patriarchy still holds sway, sustained in good measure by the institution of early marriage and by real-life aberrations in property rights.
Is it then surprising that India ranked 114 out of 155 countries in the Gender Development Index of the World Bank?
It refers to both women and men and the relation between them.
The foregoing poses a question.
Women cannot be empowered without the active participation of men.
Legitimizing gender equity in the minds of people is a complex process and women's empowerment per se is only part of the solution.
Domestic arrangements are central to the organization of gender relations.
We need to acknowledge candidly the tensions that emanate from the universalisation of citizenship and adult franchise in a democratic polity and a diverse socio-economic and cultural milieu.
The responsibility for resolving the resulting dilemma thus rests principally on the individual and the group rather than on the state.
IV Friends Ours is a society in the throes of change.
The value system itself is in a melting pot.
No foolproof recipe is known to exist.
It is in the nature of things that mistakes will be made as we proceed to actualize gender parity.
Both require unswerving commitment in word and deed.
The State's responsibility on gender issues is not in doubt and it is committed to bringing about gender equality.
Equally important is the role of other stakeholders, individually and collectively.
It should remain focused on promotion of meaningful equity and on enhancing choices.
Ladies and Gentlemen Allow me to conclude by congratulating the graduating students, the award winners and the rank holders.
I wish them every success in their professional endeavours and in their personal life.
I urge them to have the confidence that a better future can be created by their personal effort, however modest it may be.
I once again thank Chancellor Sankaranarayanan ji and Vice Chancellor Prof. Chandra Krishnamurthy for inviting me to this Convocation.
He was the founder of the warrior community – the Khalsa, and gave to the Sikh a distinct identity by introducing the five articles of faith that Khalsa Sikhs wear at all times.
He compiled Sikh spiritual texts and enshrined the Guru Granth Sahib as Sikhism's eternal Guru.
Guru Gobind Singh ji was a spiritual leader, a poet, a scholar and a great warrior.
He fought, not only against tyranny of the Delhi darbar and its religious bigotry, but also against the ills of casteism and social exclusion, and against distortions in his own faith and the growing cults of personality.
He fought for preserving the religious and social identity, dignity, of his people as also against ignorance and apathy.
The repeated harassment and persecution of the still nascent Sikh identity led the Guru to organize the Sikhs into a martial order.
In his famous missive, Zafarnama, addressed to the emperor Aurangzeb, he said: Chun kaar az hameh heelate der guzasht                                  Halal ast burden beh shamsheer dast  When all has been tried, yet -- Justice is not in sight, It is then right to pick up the sword – Is then right to fight.
The formation of the ‘Khalsa’ was meant for the protection of truth and justice.
He synthesized Bhakti or Devotion to God with Shakti or moral and physical strength and preached that the ‘strength of the Khalsa came from righteousness and piety of the soul’.
The tales of their courage and valour- displayed in battle, whether at Guler or Anandpur or at Chamkaur, remain a source of inspiration.
The Guru saw the Khalsa as saint-soldiers.
Martial prowess and strength were, but a limited aspect of the Sikh ethics he envisaged.
He laid equal emphasis on social equality, universal brotherhood, altruism and social service.
He saw the Sikh community as the reservoir and the Khalsa as the culmination of these qualities.
He believed in self-actualization of the individual, both politically and spiritually.
If the weapon he gave to the Sikhs for political determination was the ‘shamsheer’; then the ‘shabad’ was his weapon for spiritual enlightenment.
The earlier Gurus had preached essential equality and oneness of humans.
For example, Guru Amar Das called the caste system an ‘abnormality and a ritual perversity in an otherwise healthy society’.
Guru Gobind Singh took forward these teachings.
Alongside the development of martial skills, he also promoted social institutions such as the langar, sangat and kirtan as great levellers and unifying agencies.
Caste was a taboo in Khalsa and Guruji considered ‘all mankind of one caste alone’.
Ever sensitive to the need of social integration of the so-called low castes, he said:“The service of these people, and I am not inclined to serve others of higher castes.
He was a precocious and prodigious child and he mastered several languages- not only Sanskrit and Persian, but also Braj and Punjabi.
Guru Gobind Singh Ji added the writings of Guru Teg Bahadur into the ‘Adi Granth’.
However, as a sign of humility, he did not include his own writings in the Guru Granth sahib.
He used poetry, not only as a literary piece, but also as a means to instil valour in the people.
Jai Hind.
We cannot stop the clock of evolution; by the same logic, that clock cannot hinder today’s celebration of the printed book!
In recent decades the publication of books is reflective of an era of abundance.
This necessitates understanding of the Other.
It is the social sciences that give us the instrumentalities for undertaking this endeavour.
They assist the process conceptually and practically.
Experience shows that patterns of behaviour and response patterns are conditioned by time and space, by objectivity as well as subjectivity.
These need to be discerned diligently and expressed concisely.
The domain of social sciences is every thing that pertains to the functioning of a society and the interplay of forces and factors within it.
Critical reasoning and reasoned dissent are its essential ingredients.
Thus social sciences prosper in open societies and feel constricted in closed ones.
I ardently believe that social sciences should prosper for the good of a healthy society.
Their relevance to the bewildering complexity of our own society needs no commentary.
For this reason, I would like to felicitate SAGE Publications for the support they have given to social science research and publications.
I thank Shri Vivek for inviting me this evening.
I would like to congratulate the winners of the awards under various categories and commend the Ministry of Tourism for instituting a new award for ‘Best Civic Management of a Tourist Destination in India’.
These awards encourage state governments, municipalities and local government bodies, and various travel, tourist and hospitality organisations to review best practices and lost opportunities, to improve and excel.
Since times immemorial, India has been a highly desired destination for wonderers, scholars and explorers.
The names of Fa Hsien and Hsuan Tsang, Alberuni and Ibn Battuta are familiar to students of history.
A 10th century historian described India as “the land with the sweetest smell” and said its perfumes came from Paradise itself.
Languages like Arabic and Persian have proverbs relating to the excellence of India.
Travellers from European lands followed suit.
Expressions like Indian summer and Kohinoor innings found their way into English in the colonial period.
Friends This audience is aware that times and technology have induced qualitative changes in the concept of tourism.
Globalisation, advances in transport and communications, and the growth of the service industry have transformed modern tourism into a complex mass phenomenon.
Tourism has been characterised as ‘the largest peace time movement of people’.
Globally, it is estimated that there were 880 million international tourist arrivals last year.
This is a remarkable growth compared to 25 million international travellers in 1950.
Tourism has also emerged as an important provider of employment and a significant contributor to prosperity of nations.
It enables ‘people-to-people contacts’ and thus contributes to a better understanding of diverse cultures and languages.
India is an ideal tourist destination.
History, rich cultural heritage, diversity of flora, fauna and landscapes contribute to it in great measure.
Despite this, our full potential is yet to be tapped.
We recorded over 5 million foreign tourist arrivals, in addition to about 550 million domestic tourist visits.
Even so, tourism is an important sector of our economy and has contributed over US$ 11 billion to our foreign exchange earnings in 2009.
Ladies and Gentlemen The government stands committed to facilitating the visits of tourists, promoting development of tourism and hospitality infrastructure, encouraging niche tourism segments and enhancing the skills of personnel in the tourism sector.
At the same time, we should be aware of the significant challenges that remain.
Tourism must also ensure that environmental sustainability is maintained and the integrity of the political economy is not impacted.
Second, just as we seek to make the developmental process more inclusive, we must also ensure that the tourism sector is more inclusive from the point of view of composition of tourists and the economic beneficiaries of tourism.
The tourism industry must not accentuate existing social and economic inequalities but must seek to dampen them.
The outbound Indian traveller is being wooed with attractive offers and travel packages.
The scale of outbound tourism is a challenge to all stakeholders to attempt to redirect some of them to tourist destinations within the country.
We could perhaps undertake to actively encourage intra-regional tourism in Asia in general, and in the South Asian region in particular.
Ladies and Gentlemen We have seen the manner in which happenings like the global economic meltdown, pandemics, terror attacks and domestic and regional conflicts have derailed tourist arrivals.
These incidents test our national resolve and necessitate acute awareness of a precautionary culture, and its practice.
We must demonstrate that the government and the people of India are determined to overcome these challenges.
I once again congratulate the awardees and thank the Hon’ble Minister of Tourism for having invited me to participate in today’s function.
I am happy to participate in today’s function commemorating the 125th year of the birth of one of the greatest sons of India, Babu Rajendra Prasad.
Today is also his 47th death anniversary.
It is also appropriate that the Government of Bihar has held this function and has released a commemorative coin on the occasion.
These issues continue to be relevant to today’s society and polity.
His personal way of life and integrity were his greatest assets.
The nation owes a debt of gratitude to him for firming up the democratic ideal in the nascent republic.
The public display of deviation from Gandhian principles in the political and economic life of the nation bothered him.
He will be remembered as one of the last Gandhian leaders who has focussed on selfless service to humanity and upholding of the highest standards of probity and integrity in public life.
He demonstrated the need for congruence between word and deed in politics and how one could be an effective politician despite being unassuming, accommodating and a thorough gentleman.
Dr. Rajendra Prasad’s life stands as an example of upholding the moral dimension in politics.
He once said that a sense of history among people is a great national quality which leads to the greatness of nations.
It is my fervent hope that his life and conduct should continue to inspire the youth of India, especially so in Bihar, and bring back the sense of our own history of the freedom movement.
The anniversaries that we commemorate today are apt occasions to do so.
I once again thank Nitish Kumar ji for inviting me to participate in today’s function.
Islam and Oriental Religions Religious discourse is a ponderous subject.
I claim no competence in it.
Inter-faith dialogue is seemingly simpler but is in reality equally obtuse.
Here, too, I claim no expertise.
Both frighten away the novice and make the initiated cautious.
Despite this, I succumbed to Dr. Zafarul Islam Khan saheb's request to present myself in your midst today.
My personal inclination would be to dispute the title.
It imposes a geographic definition on a theme that transcends geography.
It categorises faiths or belief systems in terms of their region of origin.
This "Oriental" distinction is significant in view of the results of the survey of the world's Muslim population done by the Pew Research Centre.
It revealed that two-thirds of the world's 1.57 billion Muslims live in Asia.
Islam, indeed, is as much an Oriental religion.
These would principally be Hinduism, Buddhism, Sikhism, Jainism in India, Zoroastrianism in Iran and Confucianism and Taoism in China.
Another reason, equally valid, is the religious diversity of the Indian society and the consequent need for a dialogue with the religious Other.
Together they constitute over two-thirds of the world's population.
Such social intercourse may include religious dialogue but is not necessarily synonymous with it.
The frequency and intensity of this interaction varied with time and place.
Despite the abridgement of distances due to modernisation, urbanisation and globalisation, the disappearance of traditional channels and modes of communication have impacted adversely on this interaction.
Inter-faith dialogue has emerged as a prominent civil society initiative between nations and groups in the post-Cold War world, amidst the "Clash of Civilisations" debate and the raging ethnic and religious conflicts in various parts of the globe.
The "The Alliance of Civilizations" initiative under United Nations auspices connects people and organizations devoted to promoting dialogue among political, religious, media and civil society leaders, particularly between Muslim and Western societies.
Other such dialogue frameworks include the Cordoba Initiative on improving Muslim-West relations, the Madrid Dialogue Conference that was a Saudi-Spanish effort, the Assisi interfaith work of the late Pope John Paul II and the Common Word initiative of Muslim scholars.
The two are connected but not synonymous.
Furthermore, all systems of faith also promulgate certain universal values and principles of human conduct that are similar to each other.
Occasionally, they have been state-induced; more often, they emanated from individual or group initiatives.
The Mughal Emperor Akbar and his Prime Minister Abul-Fadl came close to such an appreciation.
However, compulsions of statecraft directed the majority of rulers in an opposite direction.
As a result, identities were principally sustained through the cultivation of prejudices rather than through spiritual and social values.
Politics contributed to it in great measure.
Rulers were motivated by political and economic considerations; principles of their faith rarely guided their actions.
The chasm was sought to be bridged by the Sufis who, as one scholar put it, took religion from the classes to the masses; another described it as "a walking incarnation of inter religious dialogue".
This achieved degree of success, had its imprint on the Bhakti movement, left some mark on perceptions but did not alter the wider picture.
Over time, the negative perceptions congealed.
It is evident, therefore, that despite adequate knowledge and good intentions, misperceptions were allowed to prevail.
Their impact on Indian society is in no need of commentary.
The need of the hour is to seek a more effective approach to further mutual understanding.
III A beginning has to be made with the first principles of social order.
This is a set of values that regulate social intercourse and dispense justice.
Every society in its political manifestation accepts these common values; it also subscribes to a set of secular values.
The process of locating these values would bring forth other commonalities.
The quest for common values would not be a substitute for religions.
These values unite, they do not divide; they foster love, not hatred.
Because they are embodied in all faiths, they transcend formal boundaries.
Together, they would involve a commitment to a culture of peace, respect for life and non-violence, justice and social solidarity, truthfulness and human equality.
Commitment is one aspect of the matter, practice is another.
The latter has to go beyond the circle of the select few and percolate to the masses.
In the final analysis, we will be judged not by what we say, but by what we do.
IV Today's conference is the beginning of a process debating how to foster dialogue between various faiths in East and South Asian societal contexts.
They are regarded as the expression of a single mind, which has built up the great temple, though it is divided into numerous walls and vestibules, passages and pillars."
This heritage has no specific religious, linguistic or cultural label and no attempt should be made to keep it exclusive or make it exclusionary.
The inclusiveness of our constitutional ideals derives its inspiration from this heritage and any process that further strengthens it is good for the nation and needs to be encouraged.
The message from this Conference should be loud and clear: I thank Dr. Zafarul Islam Khan for inviting me to inaugurate this Conference and wish its deliberations all success.
The Madhya Pradesh Academy of Administration and Management is named after Ronald Carlton Vivian Piedade Noronha.
This is appropriate since he was a visionary who devoted his life to good and proper management of public service in the state.
The erstwhile Central Provinces and Berar, today’s Madhya Pradesh, has succeeded in producing generations of distinguished and committed civil servants known for their sensitivity, honesty and rectitude.
Mr. Noronha was among the best.
His administrative abilities were widely recognised.
The President of India conferred a Padma Bhushan on him.
Mr. Noronha had interests and capabilities that went beyond his official duties.
Buch, another eminent civil servant of Madhya Pradesh, wrote about him:  The  charms of office held no lure for Mr. Noronha.
His writings give us insights into his approach to rural, tribal  and district governance.
They are of abiding relevance and can be used with  benefit to address the maladies of public administration today.
Allow me to recall  some of these:   Ladies and Gentlemen It is widely believed today that we are facing a crisis of governance in the country.
The public disenchantment is palpable.
I would therefore like to focus on the ethical dimension and framework of governance.
The Report of the Second Administrative Reforms Commission begins with a candid acknowledgment that governance is the weak link in our quest for prosperity and equity.
The ARC has recommended that there be a set of ‘Public Service Values’ and a ‘Code of Ethics’ governing public service operations to be stipulated by law.
Such values would not merely be statements of intent but would be binding on public servants.
It seeks to provide a statutory basis for the regulation of public services, as also a set of basic values, a code of ethics and of management.
The Bill is yet to be introduced in Parliament.
Friends,  It needs no reiteration that an ethical framework for governance must begin with consolidating ethical values in politics.
Our political parties and the legislative and executive wings constitute the polity whose standards have a fundamental impact on other spheres of governance.
Nevertheless, there are many elements which the civil service can implement to bring about a more humane and ethical governance structure.
Second, we need to encourage the general direction of the government towards deregulation, decentralisation and grassroots empowerment.
Third, the meaning of the concept of integrity of public servants needs to be amplified.
While financial integrity is one element of it, functional integrity and a high level of efficiency at work are equally important.
Public Servants have an obligation to protect and promote our constitutional ideals enshrined in the preamble, to uphold the rule of law, dispense administrative justice and ensure administrative facilitation.
Associations of IAS/IPS officers in some states have conducted peer reviews on the issue of corruption; this practice could be extended to cover other areas of work.
Fourth, as an elite segment of society, public servants have an important role in informing and even formulating public opinion and perception on various issues.
Civil servants from Madhya Pradesh have been well known for taking a keen interest in tribal affairs, rural development and social-sector issues including education and public health.
Against this background, the current tendency of showing a marked preference for assignments in infrastructure, finance and technology sectors is disconcerting.
This is suggestive of social priorities and the choices emanating from it and should be a matter of concern.
Fifth, the District Magistrates remain to this day the fulcrum of administration in the country.
Today, in addition, to their traditional duties of revenue administration and executive magistracy, they handle a number of functions focused on rural and human resource development, economic development and local self government.
They have become agents of social and economic change with wide mandates.
They can lead by example and even raise the profile and priority of various social themes and economic issues.
I refer here to mandatory tours and inspections undertaken by district officers which have resulted in invaluable District Gazetteers that highlighted all aspects of district administration in British India.
In the last two or three decades, these traditions have not been followed.
The Administrative Reforms Commission has also recommended that every District Collectorate must have a tour inspection cell for the purpose.
In the final analysis, and despite modern communication methods, district administration is best run through personal interface and interaction.
Ladies and Gentlemen We need to learn from the experience of our ancestors.
The object of good governance and public services is the public and its welfare.
I once again thank the Chief Minister, Shivraj Singh Chauhanji, for inviting me to deliver the Noronha Memorial Lecture.
I wish the Academy all success in its work.
It gives me great pleasure to release the report published by the Lal Bahadur Shastri Institute of Management on the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 2005 and its implementation in six states.
The Act itself has been a game-changer in the governance of the country.
It has for the first time, both nationally and internationally, articulated a rights-based approach to guaranteeing wage employment at such a vast scale.
Let us consider the numbers:   The primary objective of improving wage employment is being achieved with some success.
The government is committed to ensure the success of these objectives and any assessment of performance has to cover them.
As a nation, we have to redeem the pledge of the founding fathers to eliminate divides – urban-rural, male-female, divides of caste, tribe, community and religion.
The NREGA is a step in empowering rural citizens to steer their own destiny and ensuring that development processes are not only sustainable but also in consonance with the aspirations and desires of citizens.
Like all programmes, the implementation of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 2005 is a work-in-progress.
Suggestions for correctives have come from individuals and organisations supportive of the programme.
Every such contribution towards better implementation and operationalisation of the Act would contribute to national prosperity and individual well being of a large number of Indians.
It is my hope that the report published by the Lal Bahadur Shastri Institute of Management would also do so.
I once again thank Shri Anil Shastri for inviting me to release the report.
Shri Varghese used journalism as an instrument in his crusade  against social evils, especially the dowry system.
His efforts to promote art,  literature and education have left a lasting impression.
Friends The  topic for this year’s Memorial Lecture is timely.
The Indian media today is  indeed a new phenomenon.
The statistics themselves are staggering.
It is  estimated that we have:      Media  content has thus rapidly permeated our lives through various formats that are  constantly being upgraded through new technologies.
However,  the most important change in this century is neither these mindboggling numbers  nor the dazzling new technologies.
The purpose of journalism and the objectives  of media enterprises have undergone a fundamental change.
The evolution of the  process bears recalling.
The  pre-Independence period witnessed the use of newspapers for reform and  emancipation and for advocacy in social and public discourse.
The media also became  a principal instrument in the fight against colonial rule and in consolidating our  national consciousness.
Political journalism was the staple and provided the  sense of purpose.
In  the post-Independence era, the media was caught between asserting the  fundamental right of freedom of speech guaranteed by the Constitution and the  pursuit of the commercial motive.
By  the 1990s, our tradition of a free press had been firmly established.
However,  the winds of economic liberalization brought with them the elements of the  market economy that have changed the DNA of our media organisations.
The print media too has grown and India is today  estimated to be the world’s second largest print market.
The phenomenon of  convergence between news media, entertainment and telecom has meant that the  demarcation between journalism, public relations, advertising and entertainment  is rapidly eroding.
Second, it is now clear that amongst the  pillars of democracy, it is only the Fourth Estate that has an identifiable  business and commercial persona.
Today’s media organizations are large business  entities with thousands of employees and huge financial and other assets.
Thus  their primary professional duty to their readership has been diluted by the  commercial logic of catering to the interests of the shareholders of the  holding companies.
Third, commercial success of media  organisations has become a function of advertising revenues rather than  subscription and circulation figures.
The advertisers have thus replaced the recipients  of media products.
By the same logic, circulation figures, meant to attract  advertising, became more important than content.
Fourth, the pursuit of profit has altered  the profile of the media entrepreneur.
Today, a media enterprise is seen as a  necessary subsidiary for a growing business enterprise, a political party and  even individuals seeking to leverage public influence for private gain.
On the  other hand deception, opaque flow of political information, or slanted economic  data prevents political and economic actors from exercising rational and well  considered choices.
In  this context, the recent practices of leveraging political and economic content  in our media for overt and covert revenue generation have the malevolent potential  to tarnish our polity and even destabilise the economy.
This has led the  Editors Guild and the Press Council to investigate the phenomenon of electoral  malpractices of paid news and coverage packages.
Ladies  and gentlemen The  public purpose of journalism that guided us in an earlier era thus stands  changed.
In  a changed and changing world, it would be useful to remember that vibrant  journalism in a democracy is watchdog journalism.
It monitors the exercise of  power in the State and stands for the rights and freedoms of citizens.
It  informs and empowers citizens rather than entertains and titillates them.
Vibrant journalism is based on professional ethics and should be the rule  rather than the exception it has come to be.
Before  I conclude, allow me to draw attention to three questions on which introspection  is necessary:   I  once again thank Shri Sabu Verghese for inviting me today and wish the Mangalam  group all success in its endeavours.
This is a momentous occasion in the life of the Republic and I deem it a privilege to be participating in it.
The Election Commission of India, tasked by the Constitution to undertake a sacred responsibility, has discharged it fully.
A celebration is a festive occasion.
In the affairs of a nation, it is also a time for introspection.
Six decades on, a fair verdict would be that the glass is neither empty nor full but well above the half way mark.
We have established and sustained procedural democracy.
And yet, Dr. Ambedkar’s foreboding about the contradiction between political    equality and social and economic inequality remains valid.
The realisation of “one person one vote and one vote one value” continues to be elusive.
To fulfil its mandate the Election Commission has been adapting itself in a remarkable fashion to changes in society, polity and technologiy.
It is to be hoped, as recommended by the Second Administrative Reforms Commission, that the electoral process at the local self government level would benefit from coordination and sharing of experiences and resources with the Election Commission of India.
Second, despite stringent efforts, unaccounted election expenses constitute the major expenditure of political parties and their candidates.
Corrective action by the Election Commission and our political parties is imperative.
Third, the Election Commission has insisted upon and enforced procedural inner party democracy in recognised political parties.
The challenge for the political parties now is to bring about substantive organisational democracy.
Ladies and Gentlemen It was said in the Constituent Assembly of India that democracy was only a top dressing on an Indian soil that was essentially undemocratic.
The Election Commission deserves the nation’s appreciation and gratitude for making our soil more fertile for the seed of democracy.
I thank Shri Navin Chawla and the Election Commissioners for inviting me today.
I wish the Election Commission all success in its endeavours.
We as a people, however, are diffident in matters relating to some aspects of the functioning of the State and prefer a discreet veil to a public acclaim.
It tantalises imagination but does not add to the compendium of knowledge for succeeding generations.
We remember Rameshwar Nath Kao today for his work and for his engaging personality.
Ramjee Kao created an organisation, negotiated rather than confronted inter-agency contentions and achieved a historic success.
He could also be indulgent to a fault.
Those who worked closely with him have described Kao as a complex mix of objectivity and subjectivity in matters concerning human relationships.
A peer in a position to assess from a distance described him as a fascinating mix of physical and mental elegance, and one who was shy to talk about his accomplishments.
Kao’s business in life was intelligence, more specifically external intelligence.
Its relevance is in no need of commentary.
We can go as far back as Kautilya, or even earlier, to perceive its importance.
In fact, the methodological sophistication exhibited in Kautilya’s chapters on the secret service and internal security can be read with benefit even today.
Techniques were refined and technology opened up qualitatively different vistas.
Intelligence information, by its very nature, is a glimpse of reality.
On the other hand, the probabilities of reality that can be established by intelligence information are necessary and sufficient to enable national decision-makers to make reasonable judgments about courses of action.
While intelligence information is at times incomplete, good intelligence often has made the difference between victory and defeat, life and death.
Over time, reasons for failure are analysed and classified.
Other problems emerge as occupational hazards.
Compulsive secrecy tends to become obsessive and impacts the personality of the individual.
“The real intelligence hero”, he wrote, ‘is Sherlock Holmes, not James Bond.”  The need to strike a balance between secrecy, openness and efficacy on a continuous basis is thus essential.
Much greater coordination is required to maximize results in complex situations.
The time-honoured formula of “need to know” has to be modified by the requirement of the “need to share”.
It tends to be based on past experience and on assumptions that seem logical.
There it is referred to as a weakness which allows an attacker to reduce a system's Information Assurance.
Such a framework would necessitate going beyond the traditional approach to a comprehensive assessment of both the susceptibility of the target and the capability of the opposing force.
A complicating factor of increasing relevance is the changing nature of the actors on the global stage.
In the absence of effective multilateralism, the relative power of these non-state actors has increased to reflect the fragmentation of interests.
The conclusion is inescapable that in the world of tomorrow, the nature of intelligence required for comprehensive security would be qualitatively different.
This would have implications for the methodology of acquiring and analysing it.
As a first step, it would necessitate a wider understanding of target areas.
Much too often, governmental intelligence efforts have focused on politico-military and economic intelligence.
The reason is obvious.
It has, for instance, been assessed that in a post-pandemic world dangerous patterns of inter-state behaviour may emerge and seriously endanger security of states.
The ambit of intelligence, consequently, has to be comprehensive.
The dynamics of these may be different and may require different tools of analysis.
Access to these skills, if not available in-house, would necessitate review of security rules that generally govern the functioning of intelligence organisations.
III A particularly serious problem relates to the misuse of intelligence.
The classic instance in recent times is the process leading to the invasion of Iraq in March 2003.
Closer to the mark was the secret Downing Street Memo of July 23, 2002 in which the head of British intelligence reported after discussions in Washington that “intelligence and facts were being fixed around policy” of regime change.
The Iraq Enquiry now in progress in London is shedding more light on this.
These instances can be multiplied.
They are not the monopoly of one nation or set of nations.
They are revealed earlier in open societies and less so in closed ones.
They have led to follies and catastrophes.
Failures propel thinking in the direction of correctives and reforms.
They focus analysis on the political or economic pressures at work in individual societies.
These, together, propel thinking in the direction of accountability and necessitate oversight.
Both are considered unwanted and bothersome by intelligence communities for reasons that range from secrecy and operational efficiency to downright contempt for any individual, body or arrangement that endeavours to assess their functioning.
How then is oversight and accountability ensured?
Concerns in the matter have primarily arisen on two counts: (a) the nature and extent of supervision over intelligence services exercised by the political executive and (b) the possibility and scope of misuse of these services by the political executive.
Both concerns emanate from the absence of specific accountability, on these matters, to the legislature.
The problem is not a new one and has been faced by other democratic societies.
Despite this, the 9/11 Commission Report of 2004 found the congressional oversight of intelligence “dysfunctional” and recommended structural changes.
Other countries like Canada, Australia, South Africa, Norway, Germany, Argentina, the Netherlands, Poland and Romania have also put in place similar mechanisms of public accountability.
It has been argued that the scope of the mandate of the parliamentary intelligence oversight committee is crucial for its success.
Three models of the mandate can be identified: (a) comprehensive to include both policy and operations, as in the U.S. and Germany (b) limited to matters of policy and finance, as in UK (c) focused on human rights and rule of law, as in Norway.
Existing models range from periodic executive review of the mission statement to statutory definition of the function of these agencies.
Furthermore, and in step with the globalised information architecture, there is a case for greater openness with regard to the history of intelligence institutions.
We need to study initiatives taken elsewhere and determine the extent to which we can proceed in the matter.
The shortcomings of the traditional argument, of leaving intelligence to the oversight of the executive, became evident in the Report of the Kargil Review Committee and its sections on Intelligence in its Findings and Recommendations.
It identified flaws, acknowledged the absence of coordination and of “checks and balances”, and noted the absence of governmental correctives.
The Report referred to relevant systems in major countries but did not include in it their systems of oversight and accountability.
Some correctives were introduced pursuant to the establishment of the National Security System and the report of the Group of Ministers on the reform of the national security system in its entirety.
These improvements enhanced internal accountability and coordination but did not go far enough and did not put in place a more open system of public accountability.
The contention that openness and public discussion would compromise the secrecy essential for intelligence needs to be examined carefully.
Operational secrecy is one aspect of the matter and has to be maintained.
The legislature, nevertheless, is the organ of the state that allocates funds and is therefore entitled to insist on financial and performance accountability.
The proposed Standing Committee could fill this void; it could also function as a surrogate for public opinion and thus facilitate wider acceptance of the imperatives of a situation.
A timely synthesis would pave the way for success.
I thank Shri K. C. Verma and the Research and Analysis Wing of the Cabinet Secretariat for inviting me today.
It is indeed a great honour to have you, President Grimsson, in our midst today to receive this prestigious Award that bears the name of the great statesman and architect of modern India, Jawaharlal Nehru.
You have over the years similarly and consistently pursued your commitment to democratic practice, global peace and freedom.
I congratulate Her Royal Highness Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn and Prof. Cardona for being the first recipients of ICCR’s World Sanskrit Awards.
Her Highness is an eminent scholar of Sanskrit and Pali, is keenly interested in epigraphy and has been a patron of Sanskrit studies in Thailand and propagation of Sanskrit.
Prof. George Cardona, Professor Emeritus of linguistics at the University of Pennsylvania has singularly been responsible for making the University of Pennsylvania a center of Sanskrit learning in North America.
The shaping of Indian genius owes much to Sanskrit, not only in the fields of spirituality and religion but also in the fields of art, poetry, and literature as also of science, ethics, and systems of philosophy and knowledge.
Much of Indian cultural landscape has been formed by Sanskrit and the modern Indian languages bear the impact of the magnificence and richness of Sanskrit.
Sanskrit is a language of great antiquity.
Philologists have traced the similarities between Vedic Sanskrit and Avestan.
Sanskrit is rich; rich in vocabulary, rich in literature, rich in thoughts and ideas, rich in meanings and values.
Its grammar offers a clear structure as was recognised by Indian grammarians over 2,500 years ago.
Sanskrit literature embodies a comprehensive mapping of the human experience in its spiritual, emotional, mental and physical dimensions.
The extensive literature offers an expansive view of human nature and its role in creation.
It includes epics, profound scripture, subtle philosophy, voluminous mythology and exquisite poetry.
The grandeur of epics like Mahabharata and Ramayana testify to it; so does the beauty of Kalidasa's poetic genius.
A former President of India put it succinctly: “the culture of Sanskrit and Sanskrit literature is actually the culture of synthesis and assimilation.
The message of Sanskrit literature is one of humanism, of unity of mankind, of values, of peace and mutual understanding and of harmonious development of the individual and the society.
Acquaintance with such literature can only elevate and widen one’s outlook.
The vast array of Sanskrit texts preserves for us a valuable part of the cultural heritage of mankind, including much beauty and fascinating ideas.
So important was the language and the corpus of information it contained that its knowledge became the key to power.
The upper castes restricted it exclusively to themselves.
Social reformers such as Guru Gobind Singhji and Swami Vivekananda understood that exclusivity of Sanskrit had to end for the society to become more egalitarian.
But, Sanskrit is not only an Indian heritage.
Sanskrit has a deep influence on Thai literature and culture as well.
The royal family in Thailand has had high regard for Sanskrit learning and Thailand has nurtured study of Sanskrit.
The leading institutions like Silpakorn University, Chulalongkorn University, and others have included Sanskrit in their study programmes.
In Europe and in the United States also there has been a long and valuable tradition of scholarship in Sanskrit.
Mastering the intricacies of Sanskrit grammar brings with it great insight into grammar and etymology language structures in general.
Since the discovery of the Indo-European language connection in the late eighteenth century, Sanskrit played an important role in European comparative linguistics and was taught in major European universities.
Distinguished guests,  Ladies and gentlemen, I am delighted to be here with you this evening and to meet you all.
Since our arrival in this friendly country, my wife and I have enjoyed the warm welcome and kind hospitality of the Government and people of Botswana.
Both countries share a common and abiding commitment for democracy, rule of law and respect for human rights.
Such partnership would cover various areas including capacity building, agriculture, diamond industry, infrastructure development, health, food security and technology cooperation.
The efforts made by various Indian Trade Promotion Councils and Chambers of Commerce and Industry, in tandem with the Botswana Export Development and Investment Authority (BEDIA) and Botswana Confederation of Commerce, Industry and Manpower (BOCCIM) have broadened the possibilities of establishing joint ventures and of investment opportunities and bilateral trade.
The growing economy of India has given greater opportunity for Indian entrepreneurs to invest in Botswana which has huge reserves of minerals.
Let us take this opportunity to further strengthen bilateral trade and commerce.
I am glad to know that many Overseas Indians have extensively contributed to the development of Botswana.
Your achievements and good work are a source of immense pride and happiness for us.
We are keen to deepen our engagement with Overseas Indian communities, including with you in Botswana.
The government of India has created the Ministry of Overseas Indians Affairs the nodal ministry to implement its initiatives for the welfare of the Overseas Indians.
During my visit I have been received with great warmth and affection.
I am overwhelmed by the generous hospitality that was shown to me, my wife and the delegation accompanying me.
I am extremely thankful to all of you for having come here this evening.
I wish you all every success in your professional and personal lives.
I bring the greetings and good wishes of the Government and people of India to the government and people of Botswana.
The warm welcome and gracious hospitality extended to us is reflective of the close bonds between our two countries.
India’s partnership with Botswana is an important component of our larger vision of close, cooperative and multi-sectoral partnership with African countries encompassing political, security, economic, science and technology, human resource development and cultural sectors.
At the first ever India-Africa Forum Summit held in New Delhi in April 2008, African leaders and our Prime Minister jointly adopted a Framework for Cooperation to strengthen our engagement.
Our partnership with Africa is based on equality and mutual benefit for our peoples.
India respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity of African states and commitment to deepen the process of African integration.
We, along with our African partners, wish to promote a culture of peace, tolerance and respect for religious, cultural, linguistic and racial diversities as well as for gender equality.
India feels an affinity with Botswana.
We are both committed to the ideals of democratic governance, of accountability and transparency, of respecting fundamental freedoms and human rights, and of upholding the rule of law.
We are both engaged in the task of economic development with inclusive growth so that we can provide a better life and opportunities for fully developing the potential of our peoples.
It is through our mutual cooperation and cooperation among the countries of the south that we will successfully address our concerns.
Excellency, We have watched with great interest the initiative for economic diversification and economic growth launched by the Government of Botswana, with a specific focus on addressing poverty and unemployment.
I would like to assure you that the government and people of India have the capacity and desire to partner with Botswana in each of these sectors.
The cutting edge expertise achieved and technologies developed by India in agriculture, pharmaceuticals, small and medium enterprises, information technology, engineering and the various aspects of the diamond industry would be made available to our friends in Botswana as you continue on your journey of growth and development.
We would like Botswana to take advantage of the new initiatives announced at the India-Africa Forum Summit particularly in regard to capacity building and development.
We propose to establish several Pan African institutions including African Institutes of Information Technology, Diamonds, Foreign Trade and Educational Administration.
I am sure Botswana will benefit from some of them.
The grant of US $ 8 million made available by India to the Government of Botswana for the social sector projects in agriculture, health and education would deepen our mutual cooperation based on our complementarities and will greatly benefit the friendly people of Botswana.
We believe that our Line of Credit of US $ 20 million can be utilized for development of infrastructure or industrial projects in Botswana.
This project will facilitate tele-education and tele-medicine services and video-conferencing with all the Heads of State in Africa.
This is an example of our efforts to bring the benefits of our technological development to our partners in Africa.
Botswana has emerged as an influential player on the regional as well as the global stage.
Our two nations share common approaches on many issues on the international agenda.
We are committed to working towards a safer and more equitable world order that is responsive to change and the realities of today.
I am delighted to be in Malawi on the first ever high level visit from India since Malawi’s independence.
My entire delegation is touched by the expression of warm sentiments towards me and our country.
We also enjoyed our trip to Lake Malawi and were impressed by its sheer size and magnificence.
My visit is an expression of the commitment and determination of India to enhance high level engagement with the entire African continent, especially Malawi.
Ladies and gentlemen We have historical relations with Malawi based on shared values and common experience of our struggle against colonial rule.
Both the countries are multi party democracies, multicultural and multi religious societies with strong commitment to rule of law and respect for human rights.
Mr. Bingu wa Mutharika in his efforts to improve the economic situation of the people and bring about overall development of the country.
The Government of India has today announced the grant of US $ 1 million as emergency relief for rehabilitation following the series of earthquakes that caused loss of life and property in Malawi.
In addition, we have also announced US $ 4 million in grants to support Malawi’s development in agriculture, health and education sectors.
The cultural affinity and affection for India among you and other Overseas Indian communities has prompted the Government of India to establish the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs with a mission to intensify engagement with Overseas Indians and work for their welfare.
The Ministry provides information, partnerships and facilitation for all matters related to Overseas Indians.
The Government has also introduced the Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) scheme to facilitate your travel to and interaction with India.
We would encourage you to take advantage of these initiatives and work for deepening economic partnership between India and Malawi.
We must utilise every opportunity and undertake every initiative to harness the potential for cooperation that exists in the areas of agriculture, mining, power, science and technology, education, information technology and Small and Medium Enterprises.
After the global economic turbulence of the last two years, I am happy to inform you that the Indian economy is on track towards recovery.
We are committed to undertaking our economic reforms and are confident of reclaiming economic growth rates that existed prior to the crisis.
I thank you very much for this opportunity of meeting you all.
I wish you all the very best in your work and stay in Malawi and for your endeavours to strengthen the bonds of friendship between the two countries.
I am also deeply touched by the sentiments of goodwill that have been expressed towards me and my country.
The ties of friendship and cooperation between India and Malawi are built upon shared values and traditions.
We share a common commitment to democratic governance, rule of law, respect for human rights and inclusive development.
Our bilateral cooperation in agriculture, trade, investment, small and medium industries, culture and education needs to be stepped up significantly and new areas of cooperation explored.
We are committed to provide all possible assistance to Your Excellency in your efforts to improve the economic situation of the people and bring about overall development of the country.
The Government of India has today announced the grant of US $ 1 million as emergency relief for rehabilitation following the series of earthquakes that caused loss of life and property in Malawi.
In addition, we have also announced US $ 4 million in grants to support Malawi’s development in agriculture, health and education sectors.
I am happy to note that Malawi has utilized the Indian Line of Credit of US $ 30 million extended to it in 2008 for irrigation, grain storage and tobacco threshing projects.
We believe that our contribution building of Malawi’s own capacities, infrastructure and food security is a valuable component of our partnership.
As part of the commitments made by India during the India-Africa Forum Summit, we would also like to extend a Line of Credit of US $ 50 million to support the development goals of Malawi.
We encourage the private sectors of both the countries to explore possibilities of forming partnerships to realise the potential for cooperation.
The opportunities under the unilateral tariff concessions to the Indian market should be utilized to enhance access of Malawi’s produce to the growing Indian market.
Our cooperation with Malawi under the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) programme in the field of human resource development is a matter of satisfaction.
India has been providing training positions to Malawians under the ITEC programme and these have increased substantially over the years.
The presence of the 7000 strong vibrant Indian community in Malawi serves as a vital link which has strengthened the bonds of friendship between the two countries.
We see an important role for the Overseas Indian community in building our relationship further.
India and Malawi share common perceptions on major international and multilateral issues of mutual interest.
We are determined to work with your great country on the issues of UN reforms, the ongoing multilateral trade negotiations, fight against terrorism and the issue of climate change.
Excellency,  It is heartening to note that during your term in office the Malawian economy has performed creditably with an average growth of 7 per cent in the last five years.
This is eloquent testimony of your record of good governance.
We see responsible and responsive economic governance as a requirement not only within national boundaries but also in the global context.
Free and fair elections are the backbone of democracy.
Both India and Malawi successfully held general elections in May 2009.
It is a credit to the strength of democratic institutions and maturity of our peoples.
It is necessary for functioning democracies and countries with similar worldviews to interact frequently.
My visit to your friendly country is intended to initiate this process.
Our effort must be to make such exchanges more frequent.
May I take this opportunity to invite Your Excellency President Bingu wa Mutharika to visit India.
A warm welcome awaits you there.
It will give you an opportunity to see how much India has changed since your college days in New Delhi four decades ago.
Excellency Our partnership with Malawi is an integral element of our larger vision of close and multi-dimensional engagement with African countries.
At the first ever India-Africa Forum Summit held in New Delhi in April 2008, African leaders and our Prime Minister jointly adopted a Framework for Cooperation to strengthen our engagement.
We are confident that along with our partners in Africa, we would announce this year a joint plan of action at the continental level and a follow up mechanism to implement our Framework for Cooperation.
We would like Malawi to take advantage of the new initiatives announced by India at the Summit, particularly the capacity building opportunities and the concessional lines of credit.
I am happy to learn that India's Pan African E- Network project has been commissioned in Malawi.
This is a shining symbol of South-South cooperation.
The initiative taken by Infosys, in adding a new dimension to their pioneering work that has changed the business landscape of the country, is truly commendable.
I congratulate the laureates of the Infosys Prize 2009.
Their signal contributions in their areas of specialization have been recognized.
It would boost the confidence of researchers in physical, biological and social sciences and related branches of knowledge.
Experience the world over shows that scientific research and technological innovation is the key to a nation’s prosperity.
Equally essential is scientific study of the past and present of our society, and of its pursuit of material wellbeing.
For this reason, inculcating a scientific temper among citizens has been a national goal since the time of our freedom movement.
It was deemed essential for political and economic emancipation of our people.
This is reflected in Article 51 A of our Constitution and the duty it imposes on every citizen to “develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform”.
Our achievements in the knowledge industries, especially in Information Technology, bio-technology and pharmaceutical industries, have come about due to considerable public investment in tertiary science and technology education.
Our nuclear energy, space and defence-related industry, and the Science and Technology establishment, have created the demand for and incubated these science and technology graduates, who thereafter either became entrepreneurs or moved to the private sector.
And yet, it has to be admitted that research in pure and applied sciences has not received its due.
Our scientific output today in terms of researchers in basic sciences is insufficient for our requirements.
This has a direct impact on our contribution to innovations and patents and compares unfavourably with our peers and competitors.
I am aware that prospects for remunerative employment primarily guide the choice of subjects for study and research.
Many students in urban and metropolitan areas are not interested in higher education and prefer to pursue jobs in service industries.
The potential of India as a global power, however, and its vision of inclusive growth and optimal utilization of the human potential of all its citizens, cannot be realized without encouraging greater participation in quality higher education and scientific research.
This needs to be done by harnessing the resources and efforts of all stakeholders namely the government, universities, national laboratories and institutes of excellence, public and private sector companies, and even venture capitalists.
We do need new investments and incentives from the private sector so that our young people will be encouraged increasingly to pursue and thereafter seek a career in science.
Ladies and Gentlemen We live in a world in which business corporations are increasingly the principal economic agents at both the national and global levels.
As James Wolfensohn put it, ‘the proper governance of companies will become as crucial for the world economy as the proper governing of countries’.
The economic turbulence of the last two years demonstrates the adverse global public consequences of private greed and recklessness in some places.
The importance of the business paradigm of Infosys is in broad basing the definition of stakeholders in a corporate enterprise.
It has given new meaning to Corporate Social Responsibility and the setting up of the Infosys Science Foundation is another milestone.
I once again congratulate the awardees and thank Shri Narayana Murthy for inviting me to participate in today’s function.
I am very happy to be in Gujarat and to address this august gathering today.
The Children’s Science Congress has evolved into an unique movement that has a countrywide reach and focuses the energies of the scientists of tomorrow on contemporary and relevant themes.
I am glad to learn that there are many child scientists and escort teachers from SAARC countries who are participating in the Congress this year.
It gives an opportunity to children from rural areas and from underprivileged families to pursue their scientific curiosity through voluntary agencies and government organisations that form part of the ‘NCSTC– Network’.
It is appropriate that the 17th Congress is being held at Gujarat Science City.
As one of the most industrially dynamic and entrepreneurially active state in the country, Gujarat has established new national benchmarks.
It has been a week since the issue of climate change was discussed at the global level at Copenhagen.
Ladies and Gentlemen and my young friends Human history shows that societies that responded to challenges with knowledge, and innovations based on that knowledge, were blessed with success.
It is for this reason that popularising science and inculcating a scientific temper among citizens has been a national goal since the time of our freedom movement.
The spread of scientific temper was deemed essential for political and economic emancipation of our people.
This is encapsulated in Article 51 A of our Constitution and the duty it imposes on every citizen to “develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform”.
The challenges of economic development in the modern era of globalisation can only be faced with a strong edifice of science and technological education.
The Information Technology revolution and advances in bio-technology and pharmaceutical industries have been made possible by huge public investment in tertiary science and technology education.
The public sector nuclear energy, space and defence related industry and the Science and Technology establishment have created the demand for and incubated these science and technology graduates, who thereafter either became entrepreneurs or moved to the private sector.
And yet, it has to be admitted that our scientific output today in terms of researchers in basic sciences is insufficient for our requirements.
This has a direct impact on our contribution to innovations and patents.
It compares unfavourably with our peers and competitors on the world stage.
One reason for this is our lack of focus on the priority that should be accorded to the pursuit of science.
I am aware that prospects for remunerative employment primarily guide the choice of subjects for study and research.
Many students in urban and metropolitan areas, I hear, are dropping out of the formal education set-up after secondary schooling to pursue jobs in call centres and other service industries.
If true, this is a trend that must be arrested and reversed.
We need new investments and incentives from the private sector so that our young people will be encouraged increasingly to pursue and thereafter seek a career in science.
It is accepted the world over today that a continuing supply of high quality scientific and technological manpower is a fundamental requirement for any modern nation to avail of the opportunities of our scientific and technological age.
Making a career in science attractive to our young people is an important goal and the government is making efforts in this regard.
Allow me to mention a few steps that have been decided upon: Friends Science and technology is an important instrumentality of the modern state.
The purposes to which it can be used have to be defined by the guiding philosophy of a society, polity or state.
We in India are committed to a pluralistic society, a composite culture, a democratic way of life with guarantees of fundamental freedoms and human rights to all citizens.
Our constitution, and especially its preamble, constitutes our guiding philosophy.
They must train their mind to question, to reason, and to accept nothing that does not meet the test of scientific enquiry.
I am sure all the student scientists would go back enriched and inspired to pursue education in science and many would also look for careers in science and technology.
It is only then can the national vision of an inclusive society and the national effort to build a truly knowledge based society be achieved.
I once again thank Narendra Modi ji for having invited me to inaugurate the 17th National Children’s Science Congress and wish the deliberations of the Congress all success.
It gives me great pleasure to address this distinguished audience today on the occasion of the Human Rights Day.
This day commemorates the proclamation in 1948 by the United Nations General Assembly of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as a common standard of achievement for all peoples and nations.
Though human rights entered the lexicon of national and international law in the twentieth century, the concept that these are rights inherent to human dignity and not the gift of any political sovereign existed much earlier.
Thus every state came to be known by the rights it maintained.
Modern human rights law emerged at the end of World War II in response to violations and atrocities witnessed in that conflict.
The Charter of the United Nations, the Genocide Convention and the Universal Declaration were its first manifestation.
These were amplified in two International Covenants adopted in 1966.
Over the next three decades, a comprehensive structure of individual, group, gender and child rights was put in place, along with a modicum of operational guarantees.
It has provisions and guarantees for safeguarding the entire gamut of civil and political rights.
The Preamble to the Constitution is a reflection of the Constitutional tight-rope walked by our Founding Fathers.
It guarantees Fundamental Rights and enunciates the Directive Principles of State Policy.
The record of six decades shows that Judicial and legislative innovation on the issue of human rights has been a work-in-progress.
There have been significant Constitutional amendments on the subject of fundamental rights.
The Supreme Court’s interpretation of fundamental rights has been critical in this regard, especially on two counts.
It held that Provisions of Part III and IV are supplementary and complementary to each other.
The second has been the reading of enabling provisions of international covenants and treaties into the constitutional guarantees of fundamental rights and thereby enlarging the meaning and scope of human rights.
Our courts have commendably discharged their responsibilities in accordance with the “Banglore Principles” on ‘The Domestic Application of International Human Rights Norms’.
The most important legislative intervention on human rights has been the enactment of The Protection of Human Rights Act 1993 that enabled the constitution of a National Human Rights Commission.
It has also provided for the constitution of State Human Rights Commissions and Human Rights Courts.
At the time of establishing the NHRC, it was the expectation of civil society and human rights activists that the Commission would represent a quantum leap in the institutional mechanism for protection of human rights in the country.
An assessment sixteen years later would indicate that the Commission has done pioneering work, especially regarding its focus on the rights of women and children, custodial deaths and human rights literacy.
The same assessment would also show that the work of the NHRC has been in the nature of incremental and uneven growth.
The glass, it would seem, is half full and suggests the need for more work to ensure compliance with prescribed norms and procedures by the state agencies.
It is to be recalled that the National Human Rights Institutions of South Asian countries did resolve at a conference in April this year to appeal to their governments for support to become fully compliant with Paris Principles, including on administrative and financial autonomy.
Two other factors are of relevance.
Today we live in a world that has changed drastically since the proclamation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the adoption of our Constitution.
It opposes exclusions sought on grounds of ‘particularism’.
I would like to add one last word about ideals.
The realization of one set of ideas does not, should not, distract us from walking towards the receding horizon.
The transition from bestowed rights to inherent rights, from some rights to some people to all rights to all people, has signified quantum leaps.
There was a generation of leaders who played a role across national borders in service of good causes.
Shri Bijyananda Patnaik, or Biju Patnaik as he is lovingly called, was one such leader.
The legendary leader had been honoured with the highest civilian award by Indonesian government for support to their independence struggle; as also by the government of Soviet Union for fighting against fascist forces.
His international profile was such that, in a rare occurrence, national flags of three nations- India, Indonesia and the USSR were draped on his body at his funeral.
Biju Patnaik was not just a political leader; he was also an aeronautical engineer, an air-force pilot, an entrepreneur, a man of unimpeachable integrity and a freedom fighter.
He was a true nationalist, and still the interests of his beloved Odisha always were close to his heart.
During his formative years, he was impressed by the nationalist writings of Madhusudan Das and Gopababdhu Das.
He was also deeply influenced by by Mahatma Gandhi.
As a student, he loved sports and adventure.
His daring was evident as he actively joined the Quit India movement in 1942 and collaborated with the underground leaders like Jayaprakash Narayan, Aruna Asif Ali and Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia, even while in the British service.
He was eventually caught and imprisoned by the British Government for 3 years.
During his stay in prison, he became close to Jawaharlal Nehru.
Panditji called him ‘India’s buccaneer’ and Biju Patnaik was deeply impressed by Nehru’s commitment to democratic ideals and his vision for a new, progressive India.
An understanding developed between the two that was to shape future events not only in India but in other countries as well.
Biju Patnaik was a firm believer in democracy and was a socialist at heart.
He was a popular leader- serving seven terms in the Odisha Legislative Assembly and three terms in the Lok Sabha.
He was twice elected the Chief Minister of Orissa.
His great contribution to the country’s democracy was the role he played tenaciously and repeatedly in Orissa, and at the national level, for forging opposition unity through times of factional politics.
This vision led to the establishment of the Kalinga Foundation to popularize science and the prestigious Kalinga Award given by UNESCO every year.
He strongly believed in socialism and federalism.
He felt that unless the constituent States progress on equitable levels, India could not become strong.
He had a vision for the growth and development of his beloved Odisha.
He believed that the backbone of the country was a strong peasantry and wanted modernization of agriculture.
He was also a champion of building social capital as pivotal to bring about social change.
I join you all today as we pay respects to a great leader, a hero to his people– a visionary, an ideologist who inspired adventurous ideas.
Jai Hind.
In the years to come students of the social scene, within the country and beyond, would thank the Lok Sabha and Shri Somnath Chatterjee for instituting this annual lecture named after one of India’s greatest parliamentarians.
Hiren Mukerjee was an iconic figure.
Both were propelled as much by his ideological commitment and intellectual intensity as by his concern for the decencies of discourse and unflinching idealism.
Sixty years back Hiren Mukerjee published a perceptive account of the Indian freedom struggle.
He created, on the foundations of solid field work, a model and a structure that combines the imperative of social requirement with socially responsible business practice.
The system of micro-credit that he developed through the Grameen Bank is a successful example of development from below.
The Nobel Committee was of the view that it also promoted the cause of democracy and human rights.
Its practical relevance and mobilising potential is evident.
Its potential needs to be fully explored.
I am happy to be here today to attend this function organised by the Rajendra Prasad Academy.
The Academy has done significant work in the study and propagation of Gandhian thought and the ideas of Dr. Rajendra Prasad.
His personal way of life and integrity were his greatest assets.
He was Gandhiji’s trusted lieutenant and his devotion was as much personal as it was to the Gandhian principles.
The public display of deviation from Gandhian principles in the political and economic life of the nation bothered him.
During his second term as President, he was convinced that judicial intervention and political example were principal instruments in tackling corruption.
Nor is it enough to be good gold oneself.
You have to show your capacity to make others gold too.” Friends Rajen Babu also suffered deep anguish at witnessing the disappearance of the commitment to a higher ideal that had characterised the period of our freedom struggle.
He saw that compromising with ideals and adopting the path of least resistance was becoming the norm in independent India.
He believed in the efficacy of collective endeavour and collective sacrifice of a people for social and political transformation and it was this spirit that attracted him to Gandhiji’s ideas.
For him the highest ideal was service to fellow beings and he believed in the need to infuse this spirit of service in our society.
He felt that the youth of India must inculcate the spirit of service as a matter of actual practice and that this can only be done through reform in our education system.
In an address to the Agra Students Union in 1951, he said that character building of youth is as important as intellectual development.
He will be remembered as one of the last Gandhian leaders who has focussed on selfless service to humanity and upholding of the highest standards of probity and integrity in public life.
He demonstrated the need for congruence between word and deed in politics and how one could be an effective politician despite being unassuming, accommodating and a thorough gentleman.
Dr. Rajendra Prasad’s life stands as an example of upholding the moral dimension in politics.
It also highlights the critical questions that surfaced in that early period of our life as an independent nation.
These related to the tension between tradition and modernity, between morality and realpolitik, between integrity and convenience or greed, between the letter and the spirit of the Constitution, and between the office of the President and that of the Prime Minister.
While time and practice has resolved some of these, individual or collective conduct has accentuated others.
Nevertheless, the overarching challenge of moral rectitude in public and private life remains a compelling necessity and I hope the efforts of the Rajendra Prasad Academy would bring out this aspect of his towering personality.
I thank Prof. Bimal Prasad for inviting me to deliver the Rajendra Prasad Memorial Lecture today.
It gives me great pleasure to inaugurate this Conference.
It is no secret that the legal process of securing justice in our country is time consuming; there is also an acquittal rate of around 90 percent.
The public has thus little option but to resort to administrative facilitation and the procedures of administrative justice.
Even legislators are assessed by their ability to secure administrative facilitation and justice to their constituents rather than by their ability in law making or holding the government to account.
The RTI Act, at the initiative of the National Advisory Council, was the outcome of civil society effort of over a decade.
It was a legislative recognition of the view of the Supreme Court that the right to information was a fundamental right under the Constitution.
It was also an acceptance by the Executive that it is answerable to the people not just once in five years but every time an RTI application is filed, which is hundreds of times a day.
It has given a new meaning to citizen engagement with governance.
The RTI Act imposes new obligations on all stakeholders.
The government is called upon to be more transparent and accountable in decision and policy making, and manage its records better.
The civil society is expected to be an informal clearing house for information to help common citizens understand and use this new instrumentality.
This makes possible the participation of citizens in governance beyond elections.
Yet, the Right to Information also remains a fundamental right with limited means of justiceability in comparison to other fundamental rights.
An important lacuna of the Act has been the lack of a mandatory monitoring mechanism to look at the implementation of the RTI Act and to ensure that the Act is implemented in letter and spirit.
At present, the media and civil society groups are undertaking this task on an ad hoc basis; today’s Conference is part of such an effort.
This is in consonance with the Department of Personnel - sponsored report prepared by Price Waterhouse Cooper for assessing and evaluating the level of implementation of the Act.
It had recommended periodic Third Party Audit to ensure that public authorities comply with provisions and guidelines of the Act.
Ladies and Gentlemen My understanding of the implementation of the RTI Act leads me to believe that we need clarity on some issues and action on others.
The Act does not define what is meant by “substantially financed”.
Statutory ambiguity has meant that it was left to the Central Information Commission to define it and delineate the scope of coverage of institutions under “public authority”.
The CIC has also ruled in some cases of commercial entities where there was substantial share holding by other public authorities such as LIC, UTI and nationalised banks.
The website of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions has the RTI Act in only 11 languages.
The web sites of most Information Commissions are not multilingual covering the official languages adopted by the appropriate governments.
This issue needs to be addressed at the earliest.
Ladies and Gentlemen The RTI Act has ushered in the beginning of participatory governance and a citizen-friendly orientation to government.
The movement needs to be strengthened at all levels and support of the government, civil society and citizens is vital for its success.
I thank the Public Cause Research Foundation and Shri Arvind Kejriwal for inviting me to this function and wish the Conference all success.
I am happy to participate in the Valedictory Function today of the International Conference of Jurists.
A principal concern has been the scourge of terrorism that is disruptive of all civilized life.
Rule of Law as a concept has two dimensions, formal and substantive.
The latter seeks to ensure compliance with the law in a transparent, efficient and accountable manner.
Its success depends on the value system of a society and of those in charge of governance.
This distinguished audience is well aware of recent trends in the study of the Rule of Law.
There is a teasing aspect of the matter also.
In India we remain committed to democratic governance, transparency, inclusive development and the implementation of Rule of Law.
Our practice, however, has been marred by lapses resulting in a failure to deliver it in sufficient measure.
The supremacy of Rule of Law has been challenged by corruption and the malicious influence of money power; both are made possible by departure from norms of good governance.
Corruption is an ailment that is pervasive, cancerous and multi-dimensional.
It shakes the legitimacy of the state, erodes sovereignty of the state and its capacity to exercise sovereign functions including ensuring law and order for the citizens.
It has emerged as a significant threat to national security.
The second challenge to the supremacy of Rule of Law is elite behaviour.
National and international media is full of reports of how the elite are able to subvert the Rule of Law with money or influence.
A large swathe of society and polity even accept this situation as a way of life.
Ladies and gentlemen Our globalised world is characterized by enhanced levels of resort to violence by state and non-state actors.
Legal systems in many countries have resorted to doctrines of necessity to incorporate ‘exceptional’ and ‘extraordinary’ legislation to deal with this surge of violence.
This has impacted the primacy of Rule of Law with all its attendant implications.
The challenge for governments and legal fraternities across the globe is to deal effectively with violence within the framework of ‘normal’ laws and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Before I conclude, I would like to congratulate the winners of the International Jurists Award and the National Law Day Awards and thank the Indian Council of Jurists for inviting me to deliver the valedictory address.
I am happy to be here at this seminar organized by the Indian Council of World Affairs and the Association of Asia Scholars.
Sapru House itself has a place in the evolution of our foreign policy thinking.
Established in 1943, the Council is tasked to promote the study of national and international affairs.
More than a generation of scholars, analysts and diplomatists has passed through its portals.
Human societies live in time and space.
A historian has noted that in the year 1500 each one of the great centres of world civilization was at a roughly similar stage of development, some more advanced in one area but less so in others.
Subsequent events were to show that initiative, technological innovation, intellectual liberty and a flourishing economic base provided the critical mix that allowed the West to dominate the world for almost five centuries.
The Asian Relations Conference was held at the end of one era and at the threshold of another.
One theme of the Conference was the contours of the awakening of Asia; another was cooperation and partnership among the countries and peoples of Asia.
Asia developed, but the development was perceived and reflected in individual countries, sub-regional and trans-regional groupings.
Japan emerged from the ruins of the Second World War as an important economic powerhouse, South East Asia has witnessed rapid economic growth and there has been a dramatic change in the economic, military and political profile of China.
India has developed at a much faster pace in the last decade bringing millions out of poverty and showing that substantive social and economic progress is possible through democratic governance.
The leaderships of India and China during the past two decades have cooperated in creating mutual political and economic stakes for mutual benefit.
Economic cooperation between us has become a principal driver of our strategic and cooperative partnership for peace and prosperity.
Yet, cooperation does not preclude competition.
The post-Cold War world also demands that we readjust our theoretical models of state behaviour.
Traditional concepts of polarity, alliance building, balance of power and spheres of influence have to contend with the impact of globalization where opportunities for, and threats to, human welfare and national progress have a global character.
How India and China deal with various trans-national challenges such as terrorism, illegal migration, smuggling of drugs and arms and pandemics would affect large parts of Asia.
The joint vision of the leaderships in India and China is to ensure a global order in which our simultaneous development will have a positive impact for our peoples and economies, as also for the rest of the world.
Friends Allow me to dilate a little on conceptual frameworks.
Partnership in Asia has primarily taken four forms.
The first is one of Asian regionalism.
Asia has been primarily reduced to the total of its constituent sub-regions like GCC, SAARC, SCO, ASEAN, BIMSTEC and the MGC or the Mekong Ganga Cooperation framework.
The second means of partnership has been through inter-regional dialogue forums like Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) and APEC.
The third framework is one of global and multilateral organizations.
These include the UN and its specialized bodies, the IMF and World Bank, WTO and WIPO, Asian Development Bank etc.
There also exist thematic organizations such as the G-20, Organisation of Islamic Conference (OIC) and the League of Arab States.
The fourth framework is that of bilateral relations between countries of Asia.
The last decade has seen two contradictory trends at work.
Nations have resorted to regional political and economic institutions to resolve problems and cooperate for mutual gain.
The evolution of community building and partnership in Asia thereafter led to the launching of the East Asia Summit (EAS) process.
The first Declaration issued in Kuala Lumpur called for the EAS to be an open, inclusive, transparent and outward looking forum.
The ultimate vision is one of Asian economic integration by converging the Free Trade Agreements among Asian countries into an Asian Regional Trade Agreement.
This could, later, lead to the creation of a broader Asian Economic Community.
Ladies and Gentlemen Partnership and cooperation among Asian countries is a necessity to take advantage of the opportunities emerging as a result of the region’s increasing economic integration, as also to face the common threats of terrorism, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, energy shortage, security of sea lanes, pandemics, natural disasters  and others.
China is an important element of this architecture of cooperation, as are India, Japan, Korea, ASEAN, Australia, New Zealand and all other Asian sub-regions.
The future weight and success of Asia is the sum of the success of each of these national and regional components and the tenacity of their inter-linkages.
Long-term security and stability in Asia is dependent on the ability of Asian countries to build mutual stakes in one another.
Every framework that can further this process should be encouraged and welcomed.
I thank the Indian Council of World Affairs and the Association of Asia Scholars for inviting me to inaugurate this Conference and wish your deliberations all success.
It gives me great pleasure to attend today’s seminar organized by the National Social Watch Coalition.
The subject matter of the seminar is very topical.
Committees, of one form or another, have become central to modern governance.
We have synthesized our cultural and religious diversity and pluralism with a democratic polity.
This was possible because of the three elements of the Indian template of parliamentary democracy.
The Indian Parliament has performed its essential legislative, deliberative and accountability functions with a fair degree of success.
Parliamentary committees have become ‘mini legislatures’ helping Parliament in scrutinizing executive and legislative action.
They are a link between Parliament and people on one hand and administration and Parliament on the other.
Parliamentary committees have a history of around four centuries.
The grassroots expectation from a Member of Parliament range from routine administrative facilitation at district, state and national levels, to ushering in development projects and employment prospects for the constituents.
The Parliamentary reality is very different.
An individual Member of Parliament finds that his parliamentary performance is determined in great measure by his political party.
It is the party which decides his participation in and time allocation for debates, the broad contours of his view on major policy and legislative issues, and eventually his vote on legislative bills.
Second, the dawn of 24 hour media coverage has had a significant impact on the performance of Members of Parliament.
They are expected to independently employ staff both for research and constituency management.
Friends, The Department Related Standing Committees have addressed most of these problems.
Every Member of Parliament is a member of one of the Committees.
Officials of Ministries and departments, independent experts and civil society representatives also proffer their advice in a free and frank manner to the Committees.
This has immensely assisted the work of the Standing Committees.
Second, we need to build a political consensus so that the room for political and policy expression in Parliament for an individual Member is expanded.
This could take many forms.
In other legislative and deliberative business of Parliament, this would enable Members to exercise their judgment and articulate their opinion.
Three, every effort must be made to intensify public engagement and indeed, enchantment, with Parliament and politics.
It is also significant that 54 per cent of those polled felt that the media had the most impact on the everyday lives of people whereas only 26 per cent cited the Westminster Parliament as having such an impact.
These are not isolated phenomena.
A poll in India might reveal similar results.
Parliamentary outreach to the common citizen must receive the highest priority of both the Parliament and the government.
Engagement with the Standing Committee process would be a promising initial effort.
The role of civil society and of organizations such as the National Social Watch Coalition is very important in mobilizing citizen engagement with the polity and Parliament.
I wish the Seminar all success in its deliberations and thank the National Social Watch Coalition for inviting me to this function today.
It gives me great pleasure to inaugurate the first workshop organized by the Media Advisory Committee on “Parliament and the Media”.
It is an important opportunity to engage in discussion on this topical subject.
It has rendered excellent advice to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat and has formulated transparent policies to guide admission of media organizations to the Press Gallery.
I also take this opportunity to congratulate the media for an excellent coverage of the proceedings of the Rajya Sabha, especially during the past two sessions.
We have seen huge investments and the emergence of media conglomerates.
New technologies and products such as IPTV, Mobile TV and Community Radio have emerged alongside new media genres such as Reality TV and advertorials.
Growth always has a price.
We can evaluate the price paid for the rapid growth of media along two dimensions.
These developments have brought into focus new considerations that guide professional media decisions.
Today, the demands of professional journalists are carefully balanced with the interests of owners and stakeholders of media companies and their cross media interests.
The interplay of these conflicting demands is evident and subject of public debate.
Eminent journalist P. Sainath has recently exposed the extensive malpractice of “paid news” and “coverage packages” that were deployed during recent elections in some states.
They also state that “the press shall not accept any kind of inducement, financial or otherwise, to project a candidate/party”.
The Press Council has noted that paid news could cause double jeopardy to Indian democracy through a damaging influence on press functioning as well as on the free and fair election process.
Ladies and Gentlemen Professional training of journalists can be imparted with greater ease and today’s workshop is one such effort.
The difficult part is to resurrect the professional and ethical dimension of journalism.
An initial step is to bring back the decisive role of the editor of a media organization and to dampen the interference of activist marketing departments in news content and coverage.
Most of those attending the workshop have been covering Parliament and are aware with the functional issues of Parliamentary coverage by the media.
I am confident that you would find the workshop to be helpful in better understanding Parliamentary matters and procedures and commit you to journalistic excellence.
With these words, I inaugurate the workshop and wish the deliberations all success.
‘Unveiling’ is a nicer, more anticipatory, term.
It signals a movement from the unknown to the known.
Having settled this definitional matter, at least to my satisfaction, let me say I am delighted to be associated with today’s function.
Professor Mushirul Hasan needs no introduction to this, or any other, audience.
His eminence as a historian is in no need of commentary.
His ability to delve into the nuances of intellectual history and culture, to explore marginalised voices, adds a dimension to the understanding of a period of our history in which new challenges disrupted traditional patterns of life and induced agonising adjustments.
What we have before us today is not a single volume but a set of six.
This in itself is somewhat unique.
Together they provide a wide cross section of views emanating from or relating to Muslims and Muslim communities in South Asia over a span of two centuries.
It is history of a dialogue between the realm of religious symbols and the world of everyday reality, and of the interaction between them.
The compilation is thematic and each theme is narrated eloquently through a diversity of voices.
His purpose is to uncover important, often overlooked, facets of Muslim thought and practice in South Asia and to portray the diversity of views on a very wide range of societal interests.
An artificial construct of an existential threat has taken the place of serious study of religion and culture in time and space.
The publication of these volumes on Islam in South Asia is therefore timely.
For almost a thousand years they have interacted with other faiths and cultures.
Their experience is distinctive, their contributions noteworthy.
A deeper study of these would help dispel many of the myths and stereotypes that have been developed or imbibed thoughtlessly.
It gives me great pleasure to inaugurate the Regional Conference organized as part of the on-going Golden Jubilee celebrations of the High Court of Sikkim.
The merger of the state with the Union of India in 1975 has strengthened the functioning of the High Court and subordinate court structure in Sikkim.
It has also reinforced the separation of judiciary from executive and ensured speedy dispensation of justice.
It is a momentous occasion for the High Court and the people of the state and I extend my congratulations.
The subject of the conference is of topical relevance.
Sikkim is a progressive state and one of the first in the country to recognize the importance of human development.
Sikkim has a long tradition of religious, monastic and missionary education.
The first government school began over a hundred years ago.
The state government had focused on “education for all” along with quality, access to school within walking distance, improvement in material and human resources and encouraging vocational education and education for weaker sections.
The priority for education was also reflected in the budgetary allocation, with education accounting for around 15 per cent of the total Plan outlay.
Literacy outcomes in Sikkim have also been very impressive.
The state has a literacy rate of over 75 per cent, and in urban areas, it is over 80 per cent.
The increase in literacy has been particularly impressive in the 1990s as the government emphasized rural and female literacy.
The state has now targeted 2011 to achieve a 90 per cent literacy rate and the year 2015 to achieve 100 per cent literacy.
Ladies and Gentlemen It has taken us six decades after independence to provide the right to every child in the 6-14 years age group to free and compulsory primary education in neighborhood schools.
The Right to Education Act passed by the Parliament last month is a historic step and empowers our citizens to demand education so that every citizen can develop her potential to the fullest.
We also need to question whether there exists inequity, and segregated access to quality education.
Ladies and Gentlemen   The products of our education system are the future citizens of the country.
A rudimentary legal awareness of their rights and duties as citizens and of the basic political, Constitutional and legal scheme of things in the country are imparted in the schools.
However, empowering citizens in a more meaningful manner can only be done through specific and specialized legal awareness programmes of the kind conducted by the Sikkim State Legal Services Authority.
I hope that the existing synergy between civil society and the government would continue to further legal awareness in the state.
The narrative of educational reform must begin from the premise that every citizen has the right to a dignified life and that it is the duty of the state to make it possible.
Education is indeed the most potent instrument for social and economic mobility and for eventually bringing about social and political change.
The state government has correctly recognized the importance of education.
I can only wish all success to the government and to the legal fraternity in their endeavour to promote education and legal awareness in the state.
I once again extend my hearty congratulations for the golden jubilee celebrations of the High Court of Sikkim and thank Justice Aftab Saikia for inviting me to this function.
It gives me great pleasure to inaugurate the Second International Conference on Terrorism organized by the Jama Masjid United Forum.
The Forum’s effort to promote inter-faith understanding and confront national challenges and social evils through its awareness programmes is commendable.
The label of ‘terrorist’ was liberally used by the British against Indians, Burmese and Malays and by the French against the Algerians.
More or less every movement in the modern era had been labeled ‘terrorist’ by different parties – whether it was the Jewish Underground in Mandate Palestine, the ANC in South Africa or various Palestinian groups.
It is not thus of recent origin but globalization and technology has now made it trans-national in reach and devastating in its impact.
It has surfaced in most parts of the world and is not country, region or community specific.
The human and political context of the phenomenon nevertheless needs to be explored.
The religious commandments of right and wrong have been supplemented in the modern era with precepts and instruments of international and national law and the elements of what constitute the inalienable rights of humans, irrespective of nationality, race, religion or class.
No human society has attained perfection.
The allure of a response through “resistance” and “revolution” that political extremists and religious fundamentalists peddle in our times has been facilitated by mobility and communications.
This is particularly so in open societies where correctives can be sought through peaceful and democratic means.
By the same logic, societies must address grievances in a timely manner and not seek to avoid them on specious considerations of law, procedures or traditions.
The solution lies in according equality of status and opportunity and socio-economic and political justice to all through a system of democratic and responsible governance.
Laws must be equitable and must be applied fairly.
It is also important to remember that those advocating extremist, fundamentalist and terrorist causes constitute a tiny minority.
They neither have the religious nor political mandate for their abhorrent actions and ideologies.
A majority of humanity is too poor and is focused on trying to survive.
Their vulnerability lies in their poverty; it is this that provides an opportunity to peddlers of extremism.
This opportunity gets fructified only because those tasked with political governance and religious and moral leadership have failed.
I thank Syed Yahya Bukhari saheb for inviting me today.
I wish the deliberations of this Conference all success.
A few years back, while accepting the Parliamentarian of the year award, one of our most charismatic parliamentarians in recent history, Shri Atal Behari Vajpayee said: “Democracy is not a play of 51 and 49.
Democracy is basically a moral system.
The house of parliament is not even a small court of law, where the dissection of words takes place.
It is a political platform – I am not using the word political in its narrow sense, but in the wider sense – where hopes, aspirations and frustrations of 90 crores of people of this country should be reflected and echoed.” A parliamentarian, thus, first and foremost, must believe in democracy.
Our Constitution provides a framework for our democracy.
A framework is one aspect; its spirit is another and more important aspect.
It is the duty of the elected representatives of the people of India to prevent erosion of the vitality and spirit of democracy that is the lifeblood of our Parliament.
To this end, the personal conduct and credibility of the parliamentary representative provides assurance to the public in the efficacy of the institutions of Parliamentary democracy.
Secondly, the parliamentarian is a bridge between the overarching national interests and the local dynamics and interests that affect the constituents who have elected him or her.
The third quality that sets a good parliamentarian apart is the ability to communicate effectively with an economy of words.
The discourse employed by the parliamentarians in debating issues of law and policy in the House is not only an indicator of their personal capacities and integrity but also of their worldview and orientations.
Parliamentarians must therefore strive to bring the highest possible level of clarity, erudition and civility to their public discourses.
These qualities characterised eminent parliamentarians of the past in our democracy.
Their passion, commitment to do public good and intellectual intensity, remains the standard for measuring performance of their successors.
The Parliamentarians we honour today all posses these qualities in good measure.
They have been eloquent and have added to the prestige and efficiency of the Parliament.
The very fact that LOKMAT, a leading media house of the country, has organised this award augurs well for the future of our democratic institutions and the respect for parliamentary performance.
Lokmat was founded by a group of Indian freedom fighters, in 1918, in Yavatmal, Maharashtra.
I commend the effort by Lokmat group and particularly by Shri Vijay Darda, who has been a parliamentarian himself, for taking this initiative in bringing into public focus the good work being done by some of our parliamentarians.
I felicitate all the award winners and wish them many more years of public service.
Jai Hind.
It gives me great pleasure to participate in today’s function and felicitate the winners of the National Safety Awards (Mines) for the year 2007.
These awards are recognition of the exemplary contribution of the winning mining companies for bettering the safety standards in one of the most hazardous of professions.
Minerals are important for the economic growth of any nation and mining in our country has a history of over two centuries.
The incidents of major mining disasters and consequent legislative intervention to ensure mine safety also have a history of over a century.
While the Indian mining industry has achieved phenomenal progress in production and productivity, accidents in the mining sector are also, sadly, a fact of life.
Technology, globalization and the hunger for mineral assets fuelled by economic development has compounded the safety issues and increased the complexity of addressing them.
Mineral activities are expanding laterally and into greater depths, mechanization is intensifying and mine working is extending to adverse locations as a result of the new economic and technological forces.
Productivity and efficiency are improving, and in some cases safety and well being are also being compromised.
The death rate and serious injury rate per thousand persons have also increased during this decade.
This needs to be addressed with alacrity, notwithstanding the progress made on safety issues in the decades after nationalization of coal mines and also considering the fact that our record is better than that of many other coal-producing countries.
The Directorate General of Mines Safety functions under the premise that most of the accidents are preventable, that accidents do not just happen but are caused.
The focus on safety thus is on all the three elements of working environment equipment and the workers.
Mine safety is extremely important in human terms, keeping in view the catastrophic consequences of injury or fatality for the families involved.
Equally important is the heavy economic cost of lack of mine safety.
The Constitution of India under Entry 55 of the Union List under the Seventh Schedule mandates the Central Government to enact legislation for regulation of labour and safety in mines and oil fields.
The Directorate General of Mines Safety has been the nodal agency administering all extant legislation on mine safety.
One of the most potent instruments available with the DGMS to oversee compliance by the owners and agents of mines with existing safety laws and regulations is the periodic inspection of mines.
It is a matter of some concern that the total number of inspections carried out by DGMS has gone down by a third in the last fifteen years – from 9942 inspections in 1991 to 7041 inspections in 2006.
The paucity of human resources is an obvious hindrance to inspection work.
This would ensure that lack of personnel does not hinder inspections and thereby cause more human fatalities and casualties.
Ladies and Gentlemen It is a matter of satisfaction that mines safety is being addressed through self regulation by management and promoting participation of workers in safety management.
The two institutional mechanisms of ‘Safety Committees’ and ‘Workmen’s Inspectors’ have been given statutory backing and have led to greater strides in safety.
There is, however, no room for complacency and we must continue to emphasise on systemic inheritance and incorporation of safety measures.
I once again congratulate all the winners of Awards today for being trend setters on mines safety.
I thank Shri Mallikarjun Kharge for inviting me to this function.
It gives me great pleasure to be present at this function releasing the book of such an eminent and multifaceted personality.
I have been through the first volume of the series ‘Unleashing India’ that has given a roadmap for agriculture sector reforms in the era of globalisation.
The current volume, which is second in the same series, is focused on the related issue of optimal and equitable utilisation of water resources.
Our experience this year adds urgency to the necessity of studying this book.
We have suffered drought in many parts of the country and at the same time, in the last few weeks, large areas witnessed extensive devastation due to floods.
Even the layman senses that not everything is right regarding the planning, development and management of water resources in the country.
Water use is also an immensely political issue.
Rights of upper and lower riparian communities, within and across national boundaries, have been the subject of argument, arbitration and even resort to conflict.
We have seen such disputes within the country and even with some of our neighbours.
The way forward is one of generous accommodation and mutual recognition of rights and responsibilities of all the stakeholders.
The emerging challenge of climate change is another subject that directly impacts on water management.
Conflicts over water may exacerbate in the future as a result of the negative fallout of climate change.
We need to factor in climate change while managing our precious water resources.
I once again congratulate Dr. Moily at the release of volume 2 in the “Unleashing India” series and hope that it would receive due attention from all policy makers, academics and indeed common citizens.
It gives me great pleasure to participate in the 4th Annual Convention of the Central Information Commission.
It is no surprise that the Right to Information Act is no exception to this trend.
When passed in 2005, it was hailed as a revolutionary step aimed at fundamentally altering the balance of power between the government and citizens.
Four years hence, some dissatisfaction is evident and pertains to five major themes.
Second, very few public authorities of the Central and State governments have followed the provisions of Section 4 of the Act in letter and spirit.
The actual disclosure of information by the public authorities is marked by inconsistency and unevenness.
There has been little innovation and adaptation to capture information in government agencies and thereafter bring about suo moto disclosure.
The websites of the central and state governments also lack technical and content standardization.
Third, it is important to note that Section 4 of the Act mandates every public authority to publish the manner of execution of subsidy programmes, including the amounts allocated and details of beneficiaries.
This is a significant step when one considers that the total quantum of subsidies provided by the central and state governments to the citizens in the country exceeds Rs.
Fourth,  currently the Central and State Information Commissioners work in relative isolation, with each of their decisions not being available in a systematic manner or in real time to the general public or even to other Commissioners.
The decisions of the Information Commissioners also do not constitute precedence for dealing with similar cases.
Fifth, an important lacuna has been the lack of a mandatory monitoring mechanism to look at the implementation of the RTI Act and to ensure that the Act is implemented in letter and spirit.
Currently, the media and civil society groups are undertaking this task on an ad hoc basis.
The Price Waterhouse Cooper’s report has recommended periodic Third Party Audit to ensure that public authorities comply with provisions and guidelines of the Act.
Ladies and Gentlemen The existence of dissatisfaction is by no means a denial of the significant achievements of the RTI Act in bringing about transparency and reducing corruption.
The basic tenets have been implemented and the institutional structure is being utilized by citizens.
The Right to Information has become an important instrumentality to our media and civil society.
What we see is the beginning of decentralization and participatory governance and a citizen-friendly orientation to government.
I am not aware about the extent of acceptance and implementation of these recommendations by various stake holders.
The collective outcome of a convention of Information Commissioners must be subject to serious deliberation and active consideration, with a view to appropriate implementation.
I hope the results of this Convention will also be seriously studied and lead to better implementation of the Act.
I would like to conclude with an observation.
I have noticed that information on the RTI Act, including the translation of the Act itself, is not available in all the 22 languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule of our Constitution.
The website of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions has the RTI Act in only 11 languages.
The web sites of most Information Commissions are not multilingual covering the official languages adopted by the appropriate governments.
For example, the Central Information Commission does not have a Hindi website for dissemination of information.
Likewise, neither the RTI Act nor data on the web sites of Information Commissions of states where Urdu is the Second Official Language are available in Urdu.
This issue needs to be addressed at the earliest.
Empowerment would be meaningless if it is sought to be achieved through a language that the citizen does not understand.
I am happy to take part in today’s conference.
The Observer Research Foundation is a familiar platform for me.
The timing of this Conference, coming in the run up to the 15th Conference of Parties in Copenhagen, ensures that its deliberations would inform the national and global debate on climate change.
Climate Change remains one of the most complex problems facing humankind today.
It is expected to impact on the distribution and quality of natural resources, and consequently the developmental path of nations and the quality of lives of peoples across the globe.
An incontrovertible premise in the debate is the right of every human being to a life dignity.
This needs to be assessed in terms of some basic indicators.
Allow me to mention five of these:   Ladies and Gentlemen Sustainable development is premised on sustainable production and sustainable consumption patterns across all nations.
A complex reality of our world is insufficient and inefficient production, as also profligate and inadequate consumption of varying degrees.
These have ranged between absolute emissions, per capita emissions, current emissions and historical emissions.
At this early stage of development, India has the opportunity to exercise the right choices on climate change and sustainable development issues.
Seminars are occasions for exchange of ideas.
Lack of a global agreement on such an equitable formula is likely to cause the climate change negotiations to spill over to other multilateral, regional and bilateral negotiating platforms.
This would further accentuate existing divisions such as North-South, East-West, Developed-Developing countries, etc.
Second, pursuit of equity at the international level needs to be reflected at the national level.
There is significant variation in Greenhouse Gas emissions of various states within the country.
In the year 2000, for example, a study has estimated that the per capita emission of Madhya Pradesh was over 16 times that of Assam.
Ladies and Gentlemen Sustainable development is an issue of the peoples of the world.
The issue of development should continue to remain the focus of the global discourse.
Any action on climate change must enlarge, not constrict, the possibilities for development and empowerment of the world’s poor.
The human aspiration for leading a life of dignity must not be the outcome of the dice of geography.
I thank Ambassador Rasgotra and the ORF for inviting me to inaugurate this Conference.
I wish your deliberations all success.
I am happy to be a participant in today’s function.
His life testifies to the congruence and synergy between the principles underpinning our Constitution and the spiritual and moral principles of all religions.
I wish him many more years of service to the oppressed and the depressed masses in our society.
Friends The book edited by Shri Rajesh Chakrabarti could have been titled “The Real India”, instead of “The Other India”.
Its contributors collectively embody a vast span of knowledge and experience.
They project one overarching theme: that committed social activism leads to better public policy and programme implementation.
Probably the time has come to revisit Nai Talim as we look at the other aspects of educational reform.
He said: “I don’t want India to be an economic super power.
I want India to be a happy country.”  Prof. Menon concludes that in addition to inclusive sustainable development it is also essential to restrict consumption, keeping in view inter-generational equity.
To him, the yardstick for measuring the robustness in a society is the plight of the powerless and the poorest.
It is no coincidence that social justice has energised the developmental imperative because it seeks to make it more inclusive.
Ashish Nandy’s analysis of global anguish and anxiety makes for interesting reading.
The role of the Pathans during the last two decades could not have been more different or contrasting.
The difference can only be explained by leadership.
She makes a compelling case for globalising compassion and peace.
Medha Patkar analyses how our natural resources, especially land and water, have been the theatre of conflict and strife.
Ladies and Gentlemen Facing ethical dilemmas is part of the process of living.
Great personalities and towering leaders emerge when they respond meaningfully to these dilemmas.
I felicitate Swami Agnivesh ji and thank the Sarva Dharma Sansad for inviting me today.
I am happy to be participating in today’s function.
Its Preamble summed up the centrality of water in our life.
It is a compendium of essays by scholars and experts who know a great deal about the subject.
What I can do is to draw attention to the diversity of the regulations.
A simple listing of Central and State laws covers 15 pages at the end of the volume.
Water is a basic need and right; an integral part of the environment and the ecological system, sustaining and being sustained by them; a part of society, culture and history; and in the eyes of many, a sacred resource as well.
Given the centrality of water to all aspects of our lives, he suggests that a statement about water be included in the Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution and in the Article on Fundamental Duties.
They would help induce a more informed debate on the subject.
Shri Ramaswamy Iyer has done a great public service by bringing forth this volume.
I congratulate him and thank him.
It gives me immense pleasure to be present here amidst distinguished gathering of teachers to commemorate the birth anniversary of Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan.
President Radhakrishnan was an extraordinary human being who left his mark on multiple callings.
Above all, however, he was a teacher.
I felicitate the teachers whose life-long service has been recognized today.
I do hope they would become role models for others in this most noble of callings.
I believe we need to recognize that the success stories of today happened because their teaching process was innovative and conditioned to the specific requirements of their pupils.
The challenge then is to study and sustain such innovations and to scale up their frameworks and generic principles for application to different contexts.
This process needs to be imbibed at all levels of the educational system.
Ladies and Gentlemen It has taken us six decades to provide the right to every child in the 6-14 years age group to free and compulsory primary education in neighborhood schools.
The Right to Education Act passed by the Parliament last month is a historic step and probably more empowering, in terms of its impact, than the Right to Vote.
In the past decade and a half, we have made impressive strides in universalizing access to primary education.
Its purpose was to ensure a significant increase in overall literacy and school participation rates and address the gender and social gaps in enrolment.
The time has come now to assess whether formal enrolment has been translated into meaningful educational outcomes.
This is necessary because educational statistics focused on input indicators of human, budgetary and material resources do not give us a complete picture of outcome indicators that cut across different school boards and curricula.
The question of inequity, and of segregated access to quality, remains a problem.
The notion of equity has been central to our educational planning since Independence.
Issues of access and equity, as of quality, are two sides of the same coin and need to be addressed in a parallel fashion.
We need to assess if this is being realized for the poor and the vulnerable at the bottom of the socio-economic pyramid.
The narrative of educational reform must begin from the fundamental premise that every citizen has the right to a dignified life and that it is the duty of the state to make it possible.
Education is indeed the most potent instrument for social and economic mobility and for eventually bringing about social and political change.
In terms of content, it must inculcate a scientific temper, a spirit of enquiry and respect for dignity of labour.
Friends We in India believe the Guru to be Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshwara.
We are inheritors of a civilisational legacy that accords the highest place and respect to teachers.
It is a matter of concern that our society and polity today does not accord that primacy and reverence to teachers.
The current system of teacher recruitment, teaching methods, performance assessment, incentive and reward structure and manner of accountability raises many questions.
Far too often the focus, regrettably, is on completing the syllabus rather than on cultivating critical thinking skills and competencies.
This needs to be corrected.
One other aspect of the matter needs to be mentioned.
This is a disservice to the cause of education.
The need of the hour is to painstakingly rebuild the professional identity of our teachers, nurture their skills and professional competence through continuing education.
It must be ensured that their work reflects our Constitutional values.
I wish to specifically mention that the nation deeply appreciates the efforts of our teachers who are rendering services for bringing education to our children who are differently-abled, either in special schools, or more importantly, in an inclusive environment.
Some of them have been honoured by the national awards today.
I thank Kapil Sibalji for inviting me to participate in todayfs function.
I once again congratulate the award-winning teachers.
To the teaching community, I can only say that the future of this nation is in your hands and the nation is grateful for your untiring efforts.
Jai Hind.
It gives me great pleasure to inaugurate this international seminar organised by the Institute for Human Development.
The choice of the theme is appropriate.
It covers a range of issues of local, national and global importance relating to the wellbeing of Adivasi communities in India.
A look at recent history provides a perspective.
The political, social and cultural heterogeneity of India was amply reflected in the deliberations of the Constituent Assembly.
The Objectives Resolution was tabled by Jawaharlal Nehru in December 1946.
Jaipal Singh also gave vent to long standing grievances and articulated the problem candidly:  “If there is any group of Indian people that has been shabbily treated it is my people.
They have been disgracefully treated, neglected for the last 6,000 years.
… This Resolution is not going to teach Adibasis democracy.
You cannot teach democracy to the tribal people; you have to learn democratic ways from them.
They are the most democratic people on earth.
What my people require is not adequate safeguards… We do not ask for any special protection.
Compared to other sections of our society, the tribal population has the lowest Human Development Index.
The literacy rate of the STs at 47.1 in the 2001 Census is far below the national literacy rate of 64.84.
They also have high infant mortality rates and malnutrition as compared to other population groups.
Land thus represents the most important source of livelihood, emotional attachment and social stability in tribal communities.
It is critical for cultivation horticulture, forestry and animal husbandry.
Second, the Constitution of India provides specific social, economic and political guarantees to the Scheduled Tribes.
The economic provisions are covered under Article 46, 275(1) and 335.
The political provisions are very elaborate and are spelt out in Article 244 and 5th and 6th Schedules of the Constitution, as also in Articles 330, 332, and 243 (D).
The extent to which the Constitutional provisions have been implemented and the normative guarantees translated into policy are a matter of ongoing debate.
They also note that 5th Schedule provisions to prevent application of such laws to Scheduled Areas had not been invoked.
Third, in comparison to other disadvantaged communities and groups, the Adivasis have been less effective in constituting themselves as a Pan-Indian interest group and in articulating their grievances through the formal political system.
Geographical dispersion of the Adivasis and lack of iconic leadership with a national appeal also prevents effective political mobilisation.
To a lesser extent, our education system and our media are also to blame for the lower profile accorded to the predicament of Indian tribes.
Across the nation gigantic industrial, power, irrigation and mining projects representing the current development paradigm have caused Adivasi protests against land acquisition and displacement.
Aligning our development needs with Adivasi rights and enhancing their Human Development Index is the need of the hour.
This is also essential to prevent violent manifestations of discontent and unrest in our tribal areas emanating from exclusion and alienation.
I am confident that your deliberations would be immensely helpful for formulating policies conducive to Adivasi development.
I thank Dr. Yoginder Alagh for inviting me to inaugurate this seminar.
I am glad to be here today at the Graduation Function of the BARC Training School.
They assessed correctly the critical role that science and technology would play in nation building and pursuant to it, they established institutions like BARC.
Your success raises a question.
Ladies and Gentlemen Human resources occupy a critical role in the nuclear industry.
The life cycle of the nuclear energy sector requires extended time horizon, technological complexity and need for excellence.
It is said that on a ‘cradle to grave’ basis, nuclear activity would exceed 100 years if one were to include monitoring radioactive waste.
Human resource development therefore must long precede the nuclear power programme and must continue after ‘sunset’ even if such a programme were to shutdown.
The nuclear human resource dilemmas of the developed countries are of a totally different dimension.
They also have to attract young talent in an ageing population if they wish to revive nuclear power as a green energy option in a world facing climate change scenarios.
These problems are accentuated by the volatility in the global energy markets and reduction in government funding for nuclear research.
Our satisfaction over this should be tempered with the knowledge that the policy and regulatory landscape is ever changing.
We have seen this happen in other sectors such as power, infrastructure and telecom.
In the not so distant future, therefore, private utility providers would run nuclear power plants.
Such plants would need human resources.
While we can import nuclear fuel and technology, human resources would have to be developed and equipped within the country.
There are not many academic or professional institutions to train scientists and technologists for the nuclear industry in India.
Successful Knowledge Management in the nuclear sector at a national level necessitates smooth and orderly transfer of knowledge from research institutions to the industry and from the government and public sector to the private sector and vice versa.
Dr. Homi Bhaba, the founder of our atomic energy programme, believed that the sustainability and self-reliance of our nuclear programme is dependent on continuous availability of skilled manpower.
The same holds true for the sustainability of accelerated development of nuclear power through private corporate investment.
Our experience in regulation of a hitherto closed sector thrown open to private corporate and foreign investment has been a mixed one.
In various areas such as telecom, petroleum and gas, electricity and infrastructure development, public perception of regulatory oversight has been dented as a result of allegations of regulatory bias and conflict of interest in corporate conflicts.
We must exercise utmost caution in the regulation of the nuclear power sector so that the public interest and safety is ensured.
Ladies and Gentlemen To the young graduates who have gathered here today, I would like to say that you are joining a very distinguished family.
The events of the last one year that have witnessed a global financial and economic meltdown have dimmed the lustre of the temptations of the earlier era.
Many Indians are also returning back and the public sector is no longer the employer of last resort at campus placements.
I am confident that your training and work would see all of you emerge as multi-disciplinary specialists spanning multiple technologies and sciences and represent India on the world stage where new opportunities are emerging in nuclear research.
I thank Dr. Kakodkar for inviting me to the Graduation function of the BARC Training School today.
I also extend hearty congratulations to Shri Khalifa Gufran, Shri Abdul Gani Abdullahbhai Qureishi and Shri Ghulam Ahmed Bhat for receiving the Kabir Puraskar.
Today’s gathering is to celebrate communal harmony.
We celebrate what we like; for the same reason, we aspire to sustain it.
The first is expression of a sentiment; the second of a desire to work for it.
Our society is characterised by immense diversity.
Tolerance of diversity is one aspect of the matter; its accommodation and promotion is another.
Social peace necessitates both.
While the State has a primary role in both, public support is essential to make it sustainable.
Today’s recipients have demonstrated by their action the role of individual and group commitment to these basic human values.
A disturbing aspect cannot be ignored.
The virus persists; it is harmful to the body politic; it is anti-Indian.
It is indicative of the collective failure of our family values, educational system, the media, and the civil society.
Communal disharmony and violence are neither spontaneous nor natural occurrences.
Prejudices and stereotypes resulting in ill will and hatred are created on purpose.
If members of a society live together separately in their own mental and physical spaces, the larger objective of social amity remains unattained.
The imperative of urbanisation, modernisation and globalisation is to accept diversity not merely as a necessity but as an essential virtue of a modern society.
As a plural society and democratic polity, we need to consciously move beyond mutual tolerance towards accommodation and celebration of diversity.
An Urdu couplet sums up the requirement:  The recognition bestowed today on these exemplary individuals and organisations is a small step towards this larger vision.
It needs to be converted into a movement.
It gives me great pleasure to inaugurate today’s event that is part of the Golden Jubilee celebrations of the Bar Association of India.
The Association has a larger objective beyond the furtherance of professional interests.
It aims at promoting “public and national welfare in many directions”, and upholding “the Constitution of India, representative, free and democratic form of government established by it and the promotion of the Rule of Law”.
This audience is familiar with the vastness of the scope and the breadth of the reach of Rule of Law.
In the fifty years of its existence, the Bar Association has witnessed creeping as well as cataclysmic challenges to the Rule of Law in the country.
Democracy and the Rule of Law are inextricably connected to each other; a decline in one would inevitably impact the other adversely.
Furthermore, and in terms of contemporary imperatives, the efficacy of rule of law impacts on economic growth and development as well as on good governance and protection of human rights.
The contributions of the common law tradition, the Constitution, and the judiciary to consolidating the rule of law in India have been more than negated by unfair and lax enforcement, discriminatory application of laws and filtered access to the justice system.
The bar has an important role to play in upholding the rule of law and the Constitution of India, in the administration of justice which is a fundamental function of the State, in promoting social justice, safeguarding liberty and protecting fundamental and human rights.
But the legal profession too is facing some of the challenges that confront the rule of law.
The Hon’ble Chief Justice of India in an address at the Golden Jubilee Celebrations of the Bar Association in April this year referred to some of the multiple problems plaguing the legal system and the legal profession.
The challenge is to expand its sphere and frequency.
This can only be done by individual and collective commitment to Rule of Law, by building up opinion supportive of it, by intellectual and financial integrity, and by exposing and deploring departures from both.
The need of the hour is to revitalise the institutions of the state in terms of the Constitution and the laws.
I thank Mr. Fali Nariman for inviting me to inaugurate today’s function and wish the Bar Association of India all success in the next fifty years in furthering public and national welfare.
I now look forward to hearing Prof. Amartya Sen’s lecture.
It gives me great pleasure that this beautiful collection of poetry and paintings is being released today in the city where it was created.
In 1928, the patronage and encouragement of arts by Mir Usman Ali Khan provided impetus to the young Abdur Rehman Chughtai to make possible the nearly impossible task of imparting a concrete form to "the Uncreated Garden" of the thought of Ghalib with his pen and brush.
For this, we all owe a gratitude to them.
Especially, to render a couplet into a painting is like capturing the imagination.
Chughtai has given ample evidence of his excellence by absorbing in his colours the entire range and depth of Ghalib's metaphor.
Fired by Ghalib's imagination, ghazal became the power and destiny of Urdu.
It gives me great pleasure to participate in the Annual Convocation of the Academy today.
This is Convocation with a difference.
Your commitment to the ethical and moral values inculcated here would also be severely tested in the marketplace of your vocation.
I wish you all success in your professional efforts and moral steadfastness.
Ladies and Gentlemen Since times immemorial, the human race had to deal with uncertainties.
Evolution and progress were critically dependent on the ability to understand, analyse and use the uncertainties of life to one’s advantage.
The establishment and growth of human civilisation has led to a steady growth in various forms and dimensions of insurance to deal with uncertainty.
Today, a vibrant insurance industry is critical to any modern economy.
It has led to an unprecedented growth in the sector.
In the seven year period since 2000, the life insurance sector had a compound annual growth rate of 42 per cent.
As a result, Insurance Penetration in the country more than doubled and increased from 1.93 per cent in 1999 to 4.7 per cent in 2007.
Yet, it is still far short of the Asian average of 6.2 per cent and the global average of 7.5 per cent.
Although our insurance market grew almost eight times from $ 8 billion in 2000 to $ 54.375 billion in 2007, it still represented a mere 1.34 per cent of the global insurance market of US$ 4061 billion.
The process of reform and liberalisation was intended to benefit the common citizen who, in our society, either has no insurance or is under insured.
In this context, a few aspects of our insurance scene need to be noted; they also pose some questions.
First, the common performance indicators of the industry are focussed on premium collected, patterns of investment and number of insurance agents employed.
One does not readily come across data regarding life insurance coverage, life insurance per capita, and life insurance carrying capacity.
What is lost sight of is that the insurance industry exists not to collect money for investment but to provide insurance.
Yet, commercial health insurance covers a mere 25 million persons in a country of over 1.1 billion people.
The demand for health insurance has not been innovatively met with supply of products and services and many private insurers merely adopted the mediclaim policy of public sector insurers.
Lack of standardised health insurance data and process for data collation and analysis remains a significant lacuna.
The real challenge to the industry is to focus on product development adapted to the heterogeneity of health insurance consumers in India.
It is to be hoped that one day the ‘Right to Healthcare’ would become an enforceable fundamental right.
Third, according to the Census of 2001, the rural sector comprises 72 per cent of the population and contributes 26 per cent of the GDP.
Private insurers currently look at rural and social sector business more as an obligation rather than as an opportunity.
Despite the numbers and the demand for insurance propelled by growth in income, savings and education in rural areas, rural insurance has remained a small component of the total market.
There is a need for robust expansion of branches and recruitment of agents in rural areas to tap the rural potential.
Fourth, Micro Insurance aims at meeting the insurance needs of the rural and targeted section of the population to cover the risk of loss of life, income earning assets, habitat and risks to their health.
The efforts of the government to promote micro insurance and integrate it with poverty alleviation programmes are slowly bearing fruit.
It is worth noting that over 80 per cent of micro insurance business and agents are accounted for by the public sector LIC.
It is another area where the promise of reform and liberalisation concerning private enterprise is yet to percolate to the really needy citizens.
At present, the National Agricultural Insurance Scheme covers only 17 per cent of all farmers and 20 per cent of crop area.
The Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme that has been implemented on a pilot basis has been hampered by poor density of weather stations and lack of weather data on real time basis at village level.
The scheme faced a reality test after the recent cyclone Aila that devastated West Bengal.
The current agricultural insurance schemes suffer from low coverage and high claims-to-premium ratio.
Sustainable agricultural growth and improvement in agricultural technology and productivity would not be possible without reliable risk cover for our farmers.
Ladies and Gentlemen The format of development of the insurance industry can neither be standardised nor be prescriptive across national contexts.
The ultimate beneficiaries of the reforms process and the resultant competitive insurance market should be the Indian public.
Insurance is slowly moving beyond tax incentives and statutory insurance requirements towards becoming an effective risk mitigation instrument.
It is my hope that the students graduating today, and those benefiting by the training provided by the National Insurance Academy, would contribute to the development of a vibrant insurance market in the country.
I wish the graduating students all success in their professional efforts and thank the Academy for inviting me to the Convocation.
I am honoured to participate in today’s function marking the conclusion of the birth centenary celebrations of one of the most iconic figures of our freedom struggle, Aruna Asaf Ali.
It is appropriate that the National Federation of Indian Women that she helped establish in 1954 should commemorate the centenary.
Arunaji’s life is a testament to the immense possibilities and potential of political and civil society activism.
In 1947 Jawaharlal Nehru wrote a Foreword to a collection of Arunaji’s articles.
She pursued her ideals in different capacities – household management, active politics, underground politics, women’s movement, trade unions and even the media!
Throughout her life, Arunaji remained steadfast to the socialist ideal and has left a rich legacy of social commitment and selfless service.
This necessitates going beyond passivity and cynicism.
I thank the National Federation of Indian Women for inviting me to this function today.
It gives me immense pleasure to be here at the Award Ceremony of “Lakshmipat Singhania – IIM, Lucknow National Leadership Awards 2008”.
These awards honour outstanding leaders in the three categories that are important for national development - Business, Science & Technology and Community Service & Social Upliftment.
They also separately recognize young and emerging leaders in these areas and encourage the youth of the country to emulate them.
Shri Lakshmipat Singhania, in whose name these awards have been instituted, was an outstanding entrepreneur with a human touch.
He correctly understood the importance of management education for our industry and economy.
It is also apt that the Indian Institute of Management, Lucknow has instituted these awards.
It has had an important role in disseminating value-based education and inculcating values based leadership.
The Indian economy has been on a growth path since the early 90s.
It is this group that contains about 88 per cent of SC/STs, 80 per cent of OBCs and 85 per cent of the Muslim population of this country.
The focus of public policy, partnership with the private sector and civil society initiatives must be on the amelioration of this vast segment of our society.
The Government is committed to trying out new and innovative approaches to ensuring their welfare and wellbeing.
The awardees who have been honoured today, and those who follow their footsteps, have an important role to play in ensuring that our economic growth is inclusive and more equitable, and consequently, more sustainable and ethical.
I once again congratulate the awardees and thank Shri Hari Shankar Singhania for inviting me to this function.
The term ‘peacekeeping’ does not figure in the Charter of the United Nations.
The impulse for it comes from the first of the four Purposes of the UN, enunciated in Articles 1 of the Charter.
Its methodology has been subjected to periodic reviews, the most comprehensive of these being the Brahimi Panel Report of August 2000.
While there have been only 17 operations during the period 1948-1991, there have been around 45 since 1991.
The countries that do have a say in Council Resolutions often do not participate in their implementation.
It is now not remembered that in the Cold War period there were two peacekeeping operations established by UN General Assembly mandates – the First UN Emergency Force and the UN Security Force in West New Guinea.
These operations were characterised by negotiations with the participating countries where mission planning was done through an Advisory Committee of member states.
Their operational and mission models deserve further study.
Fourth, peacekeeping is straying from traditional mandates.
Furthermore, peacekeeping is sought to be juxtaposed into nation-building.
The irony of promoting democracy and nation-building through armed peacekeeping is indeed stark.
Fifth, there is an increasing trend to regionalise peace keeping and even to give post-facto endorsement to unilateral action.
Its theology is still evolving.
At the same time selectivity, rather than universality based on principled adherence, determines conduct.
Some of them are being honoured today at the UN Headquarters.
Our military, paramilitary and police forces have the requisite experience to match the challenge.
The establishment of the Centre for United Nations Peacekeeping under the aegis of the United Service Institution of India has institutionalised this experience to make it available to other countries.
This book is timely.
I am confident that besides enlightening the general public, it will facilitate a more focussed policy debate on the principles and mechanics of peacekeeping.
I once again thank Gen. Nambiar for inviting me to this function.
The thrust of the present volume is about widening horizons of awareness.
The real challenge then is to demonstrate that the transition to what is called here “the global consciousness” goes beyond individual self-realisation and achieves a higher purpose.
Dr. Karan Singh in the Foreword has argued persuasively that this global consciousness and convergence of various forms of knowledge must narrow the divergence between ‘knowledge’ and ‘wisdom’ and empower the poorest of the poor.
The results are all too evident, and painfully so.
I thank Prof. Kishore Gandhi for inviting me to release the book.
For those who contributed to this volume, the occasion would be no more than a blip on their radars of consciousness.
Proponents of pure theory would argue that the objective takes precedence over the subjective.
Civil servants as a species, particularly the senior most ones, are notoriously reticent to write about their experience of governance and statecraft.
Those who do, therefore, need to be read both for what they say and for what they knowingly refrain from saying.
The book before us today, despite the alphabetical jugglery in the title, is focused on questions of governance.
This unquestionably is the most important challenge before us as a society.
Every aspect of national life is affected by it; every citizen feels its impact on a daily basis.
Mr. Subramanian has sought to compile his assessments in a set of eighty short references on major themes of governance.
One could, of course, argue with some of his formulations.
I for one would not compare the Constitution of India to a religious book; instead, I would passionately advocate its acceptance as the religious book for the citizen qua citizen.
I would consider every word and expression of the Preamble as sacred.
I would, above all, not forget Fraternity as the supreme unifying principle.
I would not shy away from discussing questions of caste, of minorities, and of the impact of affirmative action taken or not taken by the Indian state and the resulting problems.
Ladies and gentlemen The state of governance in the country is the subject of considerable debate.
One analyst posed a set of four questions a few years back:  His answers were equally blunt.
The diagnosis in the book, after an analysis of all branches of government, the media, business and civil society, is on similar lines.
The author concludes that “the disease is well advanced:  however, it is not too late to make serious attempts to cure it”.
"The business			 community is irrelevant to the debate on this point."
"The	 media is interested in conflict and in ‘news’ - they have no real interest in reforms."
The judiciary indeed has the ability to force reforms.
This reminds me of what I had read in a book when I was in Iran many years back.
I submit that this degree of resignation to fate or reliance on messianic intervention is neither healthy nor justified by experience.
The point that emerges is that proper governance is possible.
The challenge then is to expand its sphere and frequency.
The solution thus lies in rejuvenating the institutions of the state, holding them responsive in terms of the Constitution and the laws and by reinforcing the moral imperative in public life.
Eternal vigilance, it is said, is the price of liberty; it is also the recipe for proper governance.
This and this alone should be the battle cry of the citizenry.
The distinguished panel present here today would do much public good if it suggests simple, easily to implement, steps to initiate this process.
Allow me to thank Raman Subramanian again for inviting me to this function.
The Award winners did not allow their modest beginnings to circumscribe their vision.
They have been ably guided and moulded by their mentors and have joined the select group of job creators rather than the vastly larger category of job seekers.
I do hope their success stories will motivate others to emulate them and undertake business ventures in under-represented regions and sectors.
We need to comprehend, ladies and gentlemen, the dimensions of the problem of youth unemployment.
The Planning Commission’s Working Group on Labour Force and Employment Projections for the Eleventh Plan, in its Report in September 2008, estimated that in the ten years from 2007 to 2017 there would be 93 million new entrants to the labour force.
The challenge therefore is to plan for millions of our youth who would need to find gainful employment.
This challenge can be better met by diversifying the sources of employment in innovative ways.
One of these is to encourage the young people to become entrepreneurs and start more micro enterprises in rural and non-rural areas and run them successfully.
Entrepreneurship can be nurtured only through broad-based and multiple sources of sustenance.
Civil society organisations and industry bodies play a major role in it.
A major obstacle lies in the lack of access to “Social Capital”.
This refers to connections within and between social networks as well as connections among individuals.
Social capital, it is said, is not what you know, but who you know.
Social capital in our country is critical to human capital formation, economic performance of firms and superior performance of some social groups and geographic regions.
We should also take note of constraints.
Thus impersonal access to social capital, of all segments of society, is the key to the broad-basing of entrepreneurial enthusiasm.
Indian business therefore needs to focus on it to make it sustainable.
I once again congratulate the awardees and thank the Bharatiya Yuva Shakti Trust for inviting me today.
This is a fine collection of essays on a serious and very relevant theme.
Prof. Akhtar Majeed is to be complimented for initiating this work.
We are a plural society.
This led us to seek a secular polity and a democratic state structure.
The Constitution sought to capture this reality and give institutional shape to it.
The experience of almost six decades allows us to assess the results in terms of the yardstick set out so succinctly in the Preamble.
It also induced us to pay attention to grey areas, and to the small print.
The book expands the ambit of federalism.
He brings out the difference between assimilation and integration, a concept integral to the rights of minorities in any society.
Professor Mahendra Prasad Singh stresses the need for India to develop the instrumentalities of multicultural nationalism together with corresponding federal structures.
Other papers develop related themes in terms of specific regions of the country.
The essays contribute meaningfully to the conceptual framework of our polity; together, they reiterate the need for more comprehensive studies on the actual working of our ‘federal’ structure.
Article 263 of the Constitution does provide for an Inter-State Council.
Many of the Recommendations of the Sarkaria Commission remain to be implemented.
The political debate appears to remain focused on seeking ad hoc solutions.
The country therefore needs from the academia more inputs to deepen the debate and carry it forward.
It gives me great pleasure to inaugurate the Fourth Civil Services Day.
This annual get together provides an occasion for introspection, self-evaluation and exchange of perspectives, experiences, and best practices.
This sets the stage for course correction.
I do hope they would continue their good work and that their example would be emulated by others in the Civil Service.
The concept of civil service has evolved over time; so have notions of its role and responsibilities.
Independent India inherited from the British period a comprehensive civil service structure and established practices.
Its utility for ensuring national unity and good administration in the country was recognized by Sardar Patel, accepted by the Constituent Assembly and incorporated in the Constitution.
The first of these related to meaning of civil service ‘neutrality’; the second to the question of its ‘commitment’ to policies.
Prime Minister Nehru responded to both unambiguously.
The civil service cannot distance itself from the fundamentals of state policy nor can it function effectively without being supportive of the policies developed through due process.
Both these notions resurfaced from time to time either to retard change or to stretch commitment from policies to individuals or political groups.
It is to the credit of our polity that the overwhelming majority distanced itself, in principle if not always in practice, from such efforts.
Ladies and Gentlemen The Civil Service is an integral part of our society and its structure of governance.
Its DNA is shaped by the imperatives of social mores, political calculus, and economic context of the times.
One aspect of this is the emergence of coalition politics and governments constituted pursuant to it.
Unlike popular perceptions coalitions are neither unique to India nor inherently destabilizing.
In many countries the world over, as also in India itself at the state and federal levels, coalitions on agreed programmes have worked satisfactorily.
The difficulty lies in demarcating the fine line between political like-mindedness and political opportunism.
It is rarely articulated coherently and inevitably surfaces in the day to day functioning of the administrative structure.
The first impact of the mischief is thus experienced by the civil servant.
The near unanimity of their views cannot be altogether ignored.
Coalition politics, too, is a fact of life.
Nostalgia and lamentation for a lost utopia that never really existed, is not an option.
Changes in the ground situation, public expectations and technological innovations, are the ground realities.
The challenge for the civil service today is to explore and develop the avenues for proper functioning in the context and the spirit of the responsibility assigned to it by the laws of the land and the policies developed through appropriate legislative processes.
The first of these responsibilities pertains to the dispensation of justice.
This, in our vocabulary, means the Rule of Law.
It is the foundation of democratic governance and the Civil Service has a pivotal role in upholding it.
Professor Upendra Baxi has sought to read the rule of law as the rule of good law that is reflective of the struggle of a people ‘to make power accountable, governance just, and state ethical’.
He opines that the Indian constitutional conception of the rule of law links its four core notions: rights, development, governance and justice.
A few years back a senior law officer of the Government wrote that the Rule of Law is under serious threat and that there is widespread popular disillusionment.
Next in relevance to the dispensation of administrative justice are questions of social development and empowerment.
Some civil servants have done exemplary work in these fields.
It is, however, a matter of some concern that very few civil servants today feel attracted to it.
Their priorities, instead, are on finance, banking, communication and IT, Railways, aviation, petroleum and natural gas, shipping, road transport and highways, etc.
This is suggestive of social priorities and the choices emanating from it and should be a matter of concern.
Take the question of integrity.
These perceptions can be quantified.
More importantly, they impact decisively on public opinion.
There is, therefore, a demonstrated need for correctives.
The only answer would lie in the principles of the Constitution.
Civil servants are the servants of the state and not of the government alone.
Each of you is enjoined to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting a social order in which social, economic and political justice shall inform all institutions.
You need to work to minimize the inequalities of income, status, facilities and opportunities and to secure a legal system that promotes justice on a basis of equal opportunity.
These are not rhetorical assertion and the realisation of these ideals should be fundamental to the governance of the country.
Coalition programmes cannot be at variance with these principles.
I will paraphrase for you the advice given to civil servants in the 8th century: ‘The ruler cannot dispense with you.
You alone make him a competent ruler.
He must profess modesty, justice and fairness.
He must keep secrets.
He must be faithful in difficult circumstances.
He must make proper preparations for everything, and he must set up every thing in its proper form… ‘Detest prejudices with all your heart.
Guard against backbiting and calumny.
It gives me great pleasure to participate in the inaugural function of the World Heritage Day organized by the Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage.
It is also an occasion for celebration, and indeed happiness, to the many heritage activists who have been associated with INTACH as it celebrates its silver jubilee this year.
In our globalised world, it is not a matter of dispute that world heritage is the shared wealth of humankind whose protection and preservation demands the collective efforts of the international community.
The World Heritage Day offers an opportunity to accelerate advocacy and raise public awareness about the diversity of natural and cultural heritage and the acute need to protect and conserve it.
It has been three decades since this Article was inscribed in the Constitution.
Its impact on the perception and practice of heritage conservation and management has not been satisfactory.
There are notable exceptions, and INTACH is one such.
Unless heritage preservation becomes a peoplefs movement and the common citizen understands the richness of our heritage and is empowered to play a more direct role in preserving it, the diversity of India would be corroded to our detriment.
The media too must play its part in advocacy for heritage preservation.
I thank INTACH for inviting me to this function and wish the World Heritage Day celebrations all success.
Sarvapelli Radhakrishnan was unquestionably one of the great Indians of the twentieth century.
Inaugurating this very Institute in 1965, he cautioned against the deification of error and becoming ‘prisoners of the status quo’.
These make interesting reading and retain a contemporary relevance.
He addressed the question in his 1942 lectures delivered at the University of Calcutta and at the BHU; these were published in 1947 as ‘Religion and Politics’.
The imperative, spelt out in the first lecture, was the ‘very rapid’ pace of change:  ‘Everywhere round about us we hear the sound of things breaking, of changes in the social, in the political and economic institutions, in the dominant beliefs and ideas, in the fundamental categories of human thought.
Established religions, however, cannot meet the world’s need for a soul.
The relevant passages are noteworthy:  ‘The final ends of political action are to be considered by the thinker and the writer.
In them society becomes conscious and critical of itself.
They are the character of a society.
It is their primary function to serve society with intellectual integrity.
They must create social consciousness and sense of responsibility which transcends the limits of the political community.
Those who can serve society in this way have a duty not to engage in politics.
They are men with warmth of feeling, who have compassion for the suffering of humanity.
We should, as politicians, exert our utmost to alleviate the sufferings of humanity.
Each has a bearing on life in society and on the meaning of citizenship.
For this reason, it remains relevant.
II  The debate on the linkage between thought and action, and the moral imperative for action, is a perennial one.
Neither exists in isolation.
The intellectual thus becomes a critical element in the value system of a society.
A definition of the intellectual and his role was provided by the sociologist Edward Shills:  ‘In every society there are some persons with an unusual sensitivity to the sacred, an uncommon reflective-ness about the nature of their universe, and the rules that govern their society.
In a celebrated essay in 1967, Chomsky had asserted that in considering the responsibility of intellectuals ‘our basic concern must be their role in the creation and analysis of ideology’ and to see events in their historical perspective.
Such perceptions have been used to create or sustain closed societies, including some masquerading as open ones.
We have enough examples in our own times of dictatorships of the right or the left, and of societies imposing a monopoly of control anchored on race, religion or atavistic claims.
The impulses and imperatives vary, so do the constraints.
They can be academics, writers, artists or activists.
Creativity and courage are the two essential conditions for their public role.
There is also a symbiotic relationship between the ideas generated within a society and its institutions of social sciences.
Persistent centrism, and continuous realignment, is one of its striking features.
This accommodation has not always been equitable.
The Constitution provides the point of reference; its Preamble is the key to its social, political and economic philosophy and to its core value system.
An unavoidable concomitant of this would be the necessity of ‘speaking the truth to power’.
Any critique of the Indian polity would thus involve scrutiny on multiple axes and require threefold examination of the relationship of the state and society, the state and democracy and the polity and the economy.
Our quest would focus on the role of the intellectual in the furtherance of this critique.
Institutions: The structure of our polity took shape through intensive debates during the freedom struggle and in the Constituent Assembly.
The Constitution bestowed centrality on the state and impacted on the relationship between it and the society.
Interest groups in society thus came to focus on elections as the first and logical step in this endeavour; the excellent work in this field done by Lokniti has been widely acknowledged.
In the process, however, the democratic functioning of the society came to be considered by most as synonymous with the electoral process.
Ashish Nandy has termed it ‘psephocracy’.
Its impression on public perceptions is all too evident today and raises questions about the health of our institutions and the state of governance.
There are some exceptions to an otherwise pervasive neglect; Pratab Bhanu Mehta and Rajni kothari, amongst others, are illustrative of these.
Mehta’s critique is on the failure of the state in the removal of inequality.
The deliberative capacities and oversight functions of the Parliament are in decline and elections are rarely fought on policy issues.
Political parties are in disarray.
He accepts that this will require an extraordinary effort.
No blue print, however, is put forth except the suggestion that the proceeds of disinvestments should be earmarked for poverty alleviation and human resource development.
To Rajni Kothari, democracy ‘as a system has not been realised in practice’ and remains an aspiration.
The Indian scene is characterised by a tradition of tolerance of pluralism, dissent and opposition.
The consensual polity that emerged in the early decades of the Republic was supported by ‘charismatic power and pliable tradition’.
The strength of the consensus was unavoidably contingent on the organisational skills of the elites and on the levels of discovery.
When both faltered, new sets of actors emerged to redefine the contents of politics in terms of new agenda of aspirations.
They include a sustained attack on sources of internal decay and degeneration’.
This necessitates a review of ideological positions on the nature and content of democracy.
One aspect of the institutions of democracy pertains to Rule of Law.
‘Sixty years after Independence’, writes the historian Ramachandra Guha, ‘India remains a democracy.
But the events of the last two decades call for a new qualifying adjective.
India is no longer a constitutional democracy but a populist one’.
It calls for a reworking of political institutions to free democracy from the stranglehold of dominant caste and class elites.
I refer in particular to the processes leading to the enactment of the Right to Information Act and the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, both in 2005.
The first has led to the empowerment of the citizen vis-à-vis the state and is unquestionably the first major step towards transparency.
Prabhat Patnaik is a case in point.
On a wider canvass, Amartya Sen has stressed the need for ‘ideas about changing the organization of society in the long run’.
The Approach Paper to the 11th Five Year Plan considered corruption ‘endemic in all spheres’.
Rights: The doctrine of rights has evolved in recent years.
A conscious effort, as yet uneven, has been made to give content to concepts of equality and justice.
The role of the judiciary, and of the Public Interest Litigation, has contributed substantially to it.
Intellectuals have contributed to both in good measure.
Both would need a wider degree of public support to allow these to pass the test of legislative approval.
The most famous in the first category is the Chipko movement of the early 1970s.
Others movements have related to opposition to the construction of major dams and hydel projects and to instances of environmental disasters; examples of these are the Silent Valley, Tehri Dam and Narmada River Valley projects and the Bhopal gas tragedy.
Despite the involvement of eminent activists, large scale public support on a sustained basis was often lacking and only the movement to oppose the Silent Valley project was fully successful.
On the other hand, grass-root levels efforts in Maharashtra, like the Pani Panchayat and Ralegan Sidhi, associated with Anna Hazare, have been more successful.
IV It is now time to revert to the role and responsibility question in regard to intellectuals.
Most would accept the need to speak truth to power and do so by advocating the correct alternative.
The answer is neither easy nor simple.
A position nevertheless needs to be taken.
The journey, of necessity, is a lonely one.
For an intellectual these habits of mind are corrupting par excellence.
If anything can denature, neutralize, and finally kill a passionate intellectual life it is the internalisation of such habits.’  Gandhiji would have put the point across in his own way.
It is like the edge of a sword.
I rejoice to walk on it.
I consider your work of immense relevance to the intellectual health of the nation.
Ambassador Sikri has written a book that compels introspection.
His basic premise is that the world has changed and continues to change.
India’s capabilities and capacities have also changed and are changing.
This requires rethinking policy objectives and the methodology for attaining these objectives.
Sikri analyses India’s position in the world in terms of an arc of prosperity to the east, an arc of energy to the west, and an arc of instability extending from West to Central and South Asia.
Cutting across there are vital sea lanes and communication channels.
His suggestion is that India should be a major player in the complex geo-strategic game that is unfolding.
Professed nobility of sentiments and piety in purpose generally camouflages more mundane objectives.
One example of it is West Asia; another is Central Asia.
An impression seems to have gained ground that West Asia, particularly the Persian Gulf region, is good for certain purposes only.
These are (a) energy supplies (b) employment for our nationals (c) a limited amount of off-shore business.
The wider strategic aspects of relationship with a region in proximate neighbourhood appear to have been put aside.
A case in point is Gulf security.
The present arrangement of competitive security, based on inclusion and exclusion, is inherently unstable and is increasingly being recognised as such.
Sikri suggests an ARF-like approach and proposes a Gulf Regional Forum for dialogue on the question.
In December 2005 a GCC foreign minister suggested a three-pronged gulf security framework.
An essential prerequisite for such an engagement would be more vibrant political relations with all the states of the Persian Gulf littoral.
The book has a number of interesting insights on economic diplomacy and energy security.
In a changing world, foreign policy tactics have to remain flexible.
One last point.
Most foreign policy analysts seem to overlook domestic factors and constraints.
The pace of our progress would also depend on the speed at which we overcome domestic strives that retard our progress.
These questions cannot be wished away; to do so successfully, we have to keep in mind and implement the basic principles of the Indian polity.
I thank you for your warm words of welcome.
Let me say at the outset that an Indian does not come to Kuwait as a stranger.
Our two people have known each other for centuries and trade was the central element in their relationship.
In the process, we familiarised ourselves with each other’s cultures, manners and customs.
Nor is there a mystery about this relationship.
We live in each other’s extended neighbourhood.
Mumbai to Kuwait is a distance of about 1500 nautical miles.
The air distance is 2890 kilometres and the flying time is 4 hours and 15 minutes.
For us in India, this is a little less than the flying time from Kashmir to Kerala.
So I come here today to continue an ongoing dialogue with friends, rather than initiate a new one with strangers.
The contents of the dialogue, then and now, relate to each other’s interests and requirements, capabilities and capacities, aspirations and achievements.
The centrality of the Gulf region to the economic wellbeing of the world is evident.
Peace and stability are essential pre-requisites to economic activity.
This translates into:  The states of the region, as responsible members of the international community, subscribe this approach.
So does India.
Two additional factors are relevant in the case of India.
The governments and the people of the region are India-friendly and Indian-friendly.
These general and specific principles form the basis of Indo-Kuwaiti bilateral cooperation.
As leaders of business and industry, you are aware of the economic transformation of India in the past decade.
Our economic reforms have been premised on a calibrated, stable and sustainable process of growth that has contributed to the economic empowerment of millions of citizens, paving their way out of poverty.
We look not merely at growth rates and per capita incomes, but at durable indicators of human capital.
Despite the current global crisis, we are determined to make the economy expand at a healthy rate.
During the last five years our rate of growth was at an average of around 9 percent; this year it will be about 6 per cent, still one of the highest registered globally.
From an Indian perspective, the two most important prerequisites for growth are energy security and development of infrastructure.
We need to increase our primary energy supply by 3 to 4 times and electricity generation capacity and supply by five to six times to sustain a growth rate of 8 percent till the year 2030.
India is in a position to absorb US$ 500 billion investment in the next decade or so to meet the growing infrastructural needs.
It is here that we see the new horizon of our engagement with the Gulf region.
Economic growth in India represents an opportunity for economies in our neighbourhood, including this region, and indeed for the global economy.
The biggest opportunity is in infrastructure development where public-private partnerships are being encouraged, as the public sector would not be able to deliver on its own.
Our rural areas have become the target area for a massive investment in infrastructure development and connectivity enhancement.
This approach also creates an employment safety-net.
The government is equally committed to renewal of urban areas through a nation-wide programme of development of urban infrastructure and service delivery mechanisms.
The emergence of India has been accompanied by indigenous development and harnessing of new scientific and technological capabilities.
Many of these can be fruitfully utilised by our partners and friends.
These relate, in the first instance, to the knowledge based industries.
Likewise, our proven capabilities in bio-technology, pharmaceuticals and health sectors and in environmental protection and conservation could be tapped by our partners to the benefit of our peoples.
Friends  12 percent of the crude oil imported by India comes from Kuwait.
The Gulf region as a whole accounts for two-third of our crude imports.
We consider this critical to our energy security framework.
Even with a very low per capita energy consumption amounting to a quarter of the world average, India is today the world’s fifth largest energy consumer.
If our economy continues to grow at 8 per cent, we would be the third largest energy consumer by 2030.
The relevance of the Gulf region as a whole and of Kuwait in particular, for our energy security would thus increase considerably.
India’s relations with Kuwait and the GCC countries are based on the fundamental premise that the Gulf region is part of our natural area of economic interaction.
In recent years, we have crafted and implemented a Look East Policy relating principally to the ASEAN group.
This is to be supplemented with a “Look-West” policy reflecting our commitment to strengthen our relations with the Gulf countries.
We have had intensive negotiations for achieving an India-GCC Free Trade Agreement.
It is our hope that this would conclude at the earliest to mutual benefit.
Friends High level exchanges between our countries provide a platform for renewing relations and exploring new avenues for mutual cooperation.
In the wider regional context, GCC is the largest single origin of imports into India and the second largest destination for exports from India.
There is nevertheless considerable scope for further expansion in trade.
Over the years India has become a major source of professionals, skilled and semi-skilled workers to Kuwait and other GCC countries.
Currently, more than 4.5 million Indians are contributing to the economic development process in the GCC countries.
Within Kuwait, the presence of a large Indian community constitutes a vital aspect of our bilateral ties.
A significant untapped area for cooperation pertains to foreign direct and portfolio investments.
Fertiliser production, for instance, offers opportunity for Kuwaiti businessmen and investors wanting to safeguard their investments in these troubled times and earn a profitable return on such investments.
Fertilisers and sources of energy such as oil and LNG are inseparably linked.
We are encouraging joint venture projects for production of urea near the source of gas/LNG so that cost of feedstock is minimal.
Thereafter, long term buy back arrangements with India ensure the financial profitability of such joint ventures.
The success of the Oman India Fertiliser Company is a vindication of this approach.
Such Indian investments in Kuwait would further strengthen our relations, and promote investments, economic and employment opportunities for Kuwaiti citizens.
"I therefore urge Kuwaiti investors to explore	opportunities in the production of fertilisers for dedicated	supply to India."
Friends,   Our objective should be cooperation for mutual prosperity.
I am confident that the India-Kuwait relationship would blossom in the years to come and there would be more intensive commercial and trade engagement and more investments made by businessmen and industrialists.
Thank you once again for the warm welcome that you have extended to me and my delegation.
I am here because His Highness the Crown Prince was gracious enough to invite me and my wife to pay an official visit.
The few hours that I have spent here since our arrival here have convinced me of the genuine warmth of feelings that the leadership in this country entertains towards India and Indians.
They are, in a very real sense, part of our extended neighbourhood.
In today’s world, extended neighbourhood means anything that is within a radius of 5 - 6 hours flying.
If the neighbourhood is disturbed, we are disturbed, if we are disturbed, the neighbourhood is disturbed.
And no two countries are better placed to do that than Kuwait and India.
So, this being the setting, we need each one of us to work to contribute towards this era, the new era of co-prosperity.
Each one of you has come here not because the government decided to send you but by virtue of your own initiative you decided to come here.
Everybody I have met since I came here has talked about the role of Indians in Kuwait.
Many of you have been here for a very long period of time.
From a small community it has evolved into a huge community and never, but never has a word of unhappiness been uttered.
There may be unhappiness about individuals; that’s a different thing.
But about the community as a group there has never been a word of unhappiness; in fact it is the other way round.
Friends we live in a world which is no longer big.
From the west coast of United States to Japan, from north to south, east to west, the world is increasingly integrated and now that has two sides to it.
We all benefit from that integration.
There is no question that the world of today is better than the world of 1990 - to take just one example.
The present economic crisis - financial crisis - in the world is perhaps the best example.
We can’t shy away from it, we have to think together.
Our rate of growth which was around 9% is likely to come down to about five and a half, six per cent this year.
But there are many things to be done.
I know some people are affected, maybe some people here are affected and some people in the Gulf are affected.
These are matters on which the Government is thinking and will continue to think because the welfare of the Indians is the primary responsibility of the government of the country.
We are, as you are well aware, and as television is making evident every hour, going through a massive process of a Lok Sabha election.
Every citizen is interested in it.
The important thing, it is not important who wins and who loses, the important thing is that every five years or so we have managed to do this exercise again and again and again peacefully and successfully.
The total number of people who would be voting is in excess of 720 million or so.
You will find some very interesting details.
But the point is that this is an enormous exercise, in purely bandobast terms.
And yet it is done and it is done successfully.
So as citizens even if you are not there to cast your vote and you are interested in it and that’s how it should be.
Tomorrow when I meet His Highness and meet Their Excellencies the Ministers of the Government we will discuss our bilateral relationship.
The message I bring is that India is keen to be an active partner in that relationship.
In that, your own cooperation and your own work will be critically important and I am confident that you would contribute to it in good measure.
I wish you all success in your work.
Thank you very much.
It is a privilege to be invited to deliver the Anandswarup Gupta Memorial Lecture this year.
Dr. Gupta was an unusual Police officer.
Besides being an outstanding professional and institution builder, he had an introspective bend of mind and developed wide ranging interests.
There are good and substantive reasons for recalling his services to the nation.
Anandswarup Gupta's primary focus was on the Indian police and he devoted most of his life to it.
His two books on the history of the Indian Police remain standard works of reference.
Police and policing is admittedly an excitable and contentious subject.
Dr. Gupta readily conceded the point; for the common citizen, he wrote, the police is 'still the object of public distrust and condemnation, if not hatred".
Our Police, he added, was "still in search of a new identity, a new image, a new aim and a new technique'.
All societies have needed a law-enforcing authority.
The relevance of the subject for the health of the society is thus evident.
The critical choice is of methodology; the problem pertaining to it was enunciated by Rousseau.
'There will always be', he wrote, 'a great difference between subduing a multitude and ruling a society'.
The inherited burden of the past cannot be ignored.
The traditional Indian systems were adapted by the British Administration for its colonial requirements.
Its public image was commented upon in 1901 by the Governor of Bengal.
'In no branch of the Administration in Bengal', he wrote, 'is improvement so imperatively required as in the police.
The Indian Police Commission of 1902-03 concurred with this observation, adding that 'there is no province in India to which these remarks may not be applied.'
Despite this candid assessment, the competing imperatives of colonial rule did not induce substantive correctives.
Two decades later simmering of discontent in the Delhi Police resulting in Calling Attention Notices in the Lok Sabha led to the appointment in 1967 of the Delhi Police Commission.
Its findings confirmed that the police establishment continued to be essentially colonial in character.
In a bold observation, it stressed the need for 'a revolution in thinking about police is required throughout the country'.
The public clamour for change gathered momentum in the seventies and led to the establishment in 1977 of The National Police Commission.
It was given wide terms of reference: to examine the role and performance of the Police as a law enforcing agency and as an institution to protect the rights of the citizens enshrined in the Constitution.
It made a number of reports.
The first of these focused on (i) police accountability mechanisms and (ii) low morale arising out of low wages and poor working conditions.
Another report dealt with insulating the police from political and bureaucratic interference.
Most of these remained unimplemented.
This led to a writ petition in the Supreme Court in 1996.
A judgment came a decade later, in 2006.
On January 11, 2007 the date of compliance was extended to April 10, 2007.
Failure to comply, partially or fully, by most states led to a contempt petition that was heard in April 2008.
Thereafter, a monitoring committee headed by a retired judge of the Supreme Court was set up.
There have been comments on its pace of work.
A judgment on the contempt petition is yet to come.
The urgency evident in the Judgment of 2006 appears to have waned somewhat.
II The subject of police reforms also brings in its wake the larger issue of the nature of our State structure and the legislative realm of the Central and State Governments.
The debate on this is testing the limits of our constitutional framework.
The federation is a Union because it is indestructible.
Though the country and the people may be divided into different States for convenience of administration, the country is one integral whole, its people is a single people living under a single imperium derived from a single source.
This could be a case of mistaken perceptions; alternatively, the reason may lie elsewhere.
A remark of Machiavelli comes to mind.
Men, he wrote, 'forget more easily the death of their father than the loss of their patrimony.'
May be there are some in our society who consider control over the police as a form of patrimony!
III Police and policing is not an end in itself.
Procedural modalities for the selection of personnel and guidelines for isolating them from political interference is one aspect of the matter; another is the need to make the police force more representative of the diversity of our society.
The police force needs to render custodial justice, even-handed treatment in communal flare-ups, be fair and gender sensitive in cases involving women.
Its handling of cases involving persons from poorer sections of society needs to change demonstrably.
Only then would the citizen accept it as people-friendly.
Community policing should remain an ideal to strive for.
In regard to the legal framework the challenge is to establish a just and practical rule of administration 'taking men as they are and laws as they can be made.'
We are fortunate that the element of justice is writ large in the Constitution.
Despite it, it took us half a century to accept the need to review and replace the central element of colonial administration.
It awaits legislative scrutiny and approval.
A new Police Act would be an initial, but by no means final, step in the administration of criminal justice in the country.
Today we have a paradoxical situation in which the process is time consuming and yet there is an acquittal ratio of around 90 percent.
A spate of other pieces of legislation would also need to be reviewed if the intent and spirit of the Constitution is to be given the shape of realizable rights of citizens.
Many correctives have been suggested by the National Human Rights Commission and by other national commissions and citizen groups.
The public expects that as a first step, the procedures of administrative justice could be accelerated.
There is one other matter that needs to be mentioned.
No reform process can succeed unless it begins with honest introspection and admits and addresses the question of institutional bias.
We have sufficient instances of these in our recent history.
I would mention one: the Hashimpura massacre of 1987.
As a result of a long period of denial, followed by official complicity to delay scrutiny, justice is yet to be rendered.
The need to anchor it in the Constitution, its Preamble and the section on Fundamental Rights, cannot be overstated.
The People of India are the source of all authority and, in the final analysis, the ultimate accountability of the police is to the people of India.
Jawaharlal Nehru underlined this point unambiguously.
Ladies and Gentlemen There is an old saying that unless asked, even a mother does not feed her child.
The current situation of the police is attributable as much to state inaction as to the disinterest of citizens.
I once again thank Chidambaram ji for inviting me today.
It is a pleasure for me to be here in Vadodara on my first visit to the state.
The occasion, by happy coincidence, is one that is dear to me.
I therefore deem it a privilege to deliver the Virasat Lecture this year.
Related to it in this context is the term Aathar meaning trace, vestige or an ancient monument; hence the terms Ilm al aathar for archaeology and dar al aathar for museum of antiquities.
It begins with a quotation from the 15th century historian Poggius introspecting on the ruins of ancient Rome, nine hundred years after the fall of the Western Empire.
This audience is familiar with the work of UNESCO, its World Heritage Committee, and with its basic principle that cultural heritage of each is the cultural heritage of all.
The responsibility is essentially national even though international assistance has been sought and given in many cases.
After over three decades since this Article was inscribed in the Constitution, it is time to assess its impact on the perception and practice of heritage conservation and management.
I would like to mention some aspects of it.
There are notable exceptions, and INTACH is one such.
There are less than ten thousand monuments protected by the Archaeological Survey of India and State Archeology Departments.
Apart from these monuments, very few public spaces have been subject to heritage conservation frameworks.
Secondly and despite minimal involvement of common people in conservation, the legislature, the judiciary and the media have increasingly played an important role in heritage conservation and advocacy.
In terms of legislation, Punjab and Maharashtra have pioneered state-level legislation for heritage conservation.
Executive regulations for heritage conservation have been notified in many states and have provided a framework for conserving buildings of architectural, historical and aesthetic value.
These have also included environmental and natural features such as coast lines and rock formations.
The Judiciary has played an important role in preventing demolition of historical structures and in stopping industrial or other activities that could damage heritage monuments.
Thirdly, heritage sites in India not only house historical monuments but also continuous areas of habitat for the local population.
Conservation efforts have had to be balanced against housing and other infrastructural needs of urban planning and development.
It was only in very few instances that heritage conservation emerged as a vehicle for both economic growth and cultural regeneration.
A fourth point pertains to increasing globalization and homogenization and its adverse impact on cultural distinctiveness.
Finally, national and community narratives of tangible and intangible heritage have not only become politicized but have in fact been used as instruments of political mobilization.
This has posed one of the most serious challenges to heritage preservation in India and in the South Asian region.
Ladies and Gentlemen How we interpret our heritage is a matter of perception, depth of knowledge and breadth of vision.
Jawaharlal Nehru described Indian culture like some ancient palimpsest on which the imprint of succeeding generations have unrecognizably merged.
It reflects the composite culture of Gujarat and the multi-cultural ethos of our nation.
This site is a shining example of archaeological, historic and living cultural heritage that includes pre-historic sites and strong Hindu, Jain and Islamic influences in its history, monuments and even in the myths and legends surrounding it.
It has contemporary relevance for the state and for the country.
The matter does not and must not remain confined to state agencies.
I once again thank Mr. Hasmukh Shah and the Heritage Trust for inviting me to deliver the Virasat Lecture and wish every success to all those associated with the Trust.
I am happy to be here today to declare open the NASSCOM campus.
It is appropriate that this new campus of our apex Information Technology business body should come up in NOIDA, which is emerging as one India’s fastest growing technology hubs.
I am confident that from its new quarters, NASSCOM would continue its work to achieve greater success.
For this reason, Nasscom was created as a business body for campaigning progressive government support.
The industry has not been sitting on its laurels.
In short, you will have to be more innovative.
Participating in a ‘digital dialogue’ last year, the Prime Minister had promised to give ‘absolute support’ to make enterprise and innovation easier so that India emerges as an innovation hub and keeps pace with the fast changing world.
He had said “The world is changing quicker than ever before and we cannot remain oblivious to that.
The honest truth is that we lag behind many others, including our peers.
The Global Innovation Index 20162 ranks us 66th out of 128 countries.
Although this is a jump of 15 places over the last year’s rank, India still lags behind China at 25, Russia at 43 and South Africa at 54.
The then Governor of Reserve Bank of India, in a talk at IIT Delhi last year, listed out some ways for a nation “to keep the idea factory open”.
NASSCOM has its task cut out for itself.
It must continue to:  I wish you success in this endeavor.
Jai Hind.
One cannot come to this College without a realization of its place in Delhi’s intellectual history.
The occasion of my visit is exciting as well as humbling.
To deliver a memorial lecture instituted in honour of a great son of India is a privilege to be cherished.
Zakir Hussian was an exemplary human being.
I was an undergraduate at Aligarh when he was the Vice Chancellor.
One evening some of us were returning from a hockey match when, in the narrow pathways of the campus, he drove past at a slow pace.
Few but very few today bother to recall his work as a thinker and an educationist.
His thinking was not an ivory tower exercise.
Inspired by the Gandhian ideal, Zakir Hussain’s focus was on training of the mind, body and soul to bring forth a complete human being.
Nor was he alone in this quest.
The question of education of the youth was addressed by many of our leaders during the freedom movement.
The most significant initiative in this regard was the Wardha Scheme of Education proposed after the All India National Education Conference held in October 1937 under the presidentship of Gandhiji, and the Nai Talim that emerged from there.
The first two Resolutions of the Wardha Scheme were incorporated into the Constitution of the Republic.
The Right to Education is yet to be operationalised six decades after Independence.
Adequate facilities for instruction in the mother tongue at the primary stage of education do not exist in all parts of the country.
The Nai Talim is, for all purposes, dead.
Even Gandhian institutions in the country do not follow the Nai Talim in letter and spirit.
Far from being self-sufficient, education has either become state supported, with questionable quality, or commercialized and elitist, out of the reach of common citizens.
Friends, The need for vocational training and skill development to facilitate employment is axiomatic for a country of our size and population.
The need is more acute due to peculiarities of our demography, economy and the labour market.
Let me mention a few of these.
In the first place, over 60 per cent of the total population is in the working age group with the child dependency ratio of over 30 per cent and old age dependency ratio of over 5 per cent.
This indicates a predominantly youth profile.
It is estimated that only 5 per cent of our labour force in the 20-24 age group has received vocational training compared to levels of 60-80 per cent in industrialized countries.
Around 65 per cent of the work force is either illiterate or has only obtained literacy up to the primary level.
Among those unemployed, around 70 per cent constitute those who are educated but without requisite professional skills.
This illustrates the difference between possessing educational qualifications as distinct from skill sets required for jobs.
Thirdly, the overall labour productivity in India is much lower, even in comparison to other developing countries.
Labour productivity in India, for example, is estimated at a quarter of the figure for Mexico.
In the fourth place, high dropout rates characterize our primary and secondary education.
Yet, we only have around 3 million vocational training slots available in the country for a total labour force of over 400 million and the annual entry of 7-8 million new workers.
Very few of these vocational training opportunities are available to school drops outs.
Finally, India is unique amongst developing countries that 93 per cent of its work force is employed in the unorganized sector producing around 60 per cent of the GDP.
The structure of the formal vocational training system in our country is geared for the educated and does not cater to those with limited educational attainment working in the unorganized sector.
The diagnosis, ladies and gentlemen, is clear.
The question now is about the proposed treatment.
Its urgency is evident.
Skill training and employability cannot be addressed as standalone themes.
Efforts towards vocational training must be geared towards increasing employability in the organised sector and improving the quality of jobs in the unorganized sector.
It also calls for extending functional literacy programmes to the majority of work force who have poor educational attainments.
The National Knowledge Commission has suggested four alternate delivery models for vocational training and for capacity expansion.
First, institution of a public private partnership framework to benefit from private sector delivery in training and to benefit from increased linkages between vocational training institutes and industry.
Second, a decentralized model that is inexpensive and scaleable and would focus on low intensity and low cost programmes at the local level based on existing infrastructure.
Third, distance learning modules for continuing education and skill upgradation of workers.
Fourth, computerised vocational training courses to leverage ICT platforms and dovetail with similar efforts in areas of literacy and agriculture.
Ladies and Gentlemen We need to reorganize and reorient our fragmented vocational educational system that is currently spread over 17 different organisations and departments.
We also need to ensure the framework of skill standards, assessment and certifications that allows for mobility of credits and qualifications.
Our accreditation and certification norms must align with global standards to empower our work force seeking employment abroad.
There is awareness in Government of the need for improving the access to, and scope of, vocational training in the country.
The Prime Minister has noted that supply shortages of skills can constrain growth and that this shortage is felt not only in high-tech skills but also in basic skills, such as plumbers, electricians and nurses.
To meet this skill shortage, the government is committed to opening new institutions at various levels of the knowledge pyramid, with particular emphasis on a Vocational Education Mission.
Friends, Given his close knowledge of matters educational, Zakir Hussain was candid about the limitations of what had been achieved.
Zakir Hussain personified the quest for change.
I thank Dr. Aslam Parvaiz for inviting me today.
It gives me great pleasure to be present today at this function and to release this book outlining human stories of hope and encouragement from various parts of the country.
The significance of the serious public health challenge posed by HIV-AIDS is widely accepted and undeniable.
The challenges multiply when the incidence is in a developing country, where illiteracy and poverty complicate prevention and countering of AIDS.
They need the hope, caring touch and commitment that many individuals and civil society organizations in the country are trying to provide.
"Friends 	As I went through the stories of hope and despair of various children in the book, I was particularly struck by the plight of the so-called ‘platform boys and girls’."
I once again congratulate FXB India for their efforts and wish all its members success in their endeavours.
Hence, I will keep my own speech short.
Surveying and plotting of geographic data has, since ancient times, been an important component of governance because of its intrinsic linkage with revenue collection of the state.
Systematic land surveying by Todarmal was said to have enhanced Emperor Akbar’s administrative efficiency and governance.
Today, we live in a world that has been drastically transformed by technological innovation and advancement, especially in the last two decades.
Geography, combined with information technology, spread of the internet and advances in space technology, is significantly transforming our lives.
This democratization process began with tele-education in India and later moved to fixed line telephony, computers and the internet, and finally mobile telephony.
Geospatial technologies are no exception.
The instruments for accessing geospatial information have also become simpler.
Yet, the technological dexterity of geospatial data and the immense commercial and economic utility brought about by convergence pose a few dilemmas.
One hears of small success stories of fishermen and farmers using satellite data for their vocation.
One visit to the countryside would indicate that these are exceptions rather than the rule.
Likewise, the utility of geospatial systems for land records is very obvious.
Second, like any technology, geospatial technologies could be used either for welfare of mankind or to its detriment.
Sensitive geospatial data have serious implications not only for development and governance but also for national security.
The terrorists who attacked Mumbai used global positioning systems and Google Earth maps to identify their targets and the terrain.
The solution to this would not be in capping the use of technologies or in preventing access.
The only constructive option lies in better regulation of geospatial data and of relevant stake-holders.
A fine balance is needed to allow geospatial technologies to flourish without compromising on national security concerns.
The Government of India is committed to bring legislation for creating a National Geospatial Data Regulatory Authority.
Third, one cannot deny that profit making is a powerful impulse for innovation.
This desire has resulted in new tools, devices and applications that utilize geospatial data.
The private sector can be relied upon to develop applications and technologies where there is money to be made.
It is my hope that your deliberations over the next three days would focus on this issue and what it means in practical terms for the majority of our citizens.
I wish your deliberations all success and once again thank Minister Kapil Sibal for inviting me to inaugurate this Forum.
Distinguished Guests Ladies and gentlemen Entrepreneurship was indeed an ancient theme in Indian history.
The 21st century has come to be defined by the dynamism of its entrepreneurs and enterprises.
They have created opportunities where none existed earlier.
The growth of entrepreneurs is being seen as a more sustainable approach towards addressing some of the more intractable problems of a developing economy, including unemployment and poverty.
The Myanmar–India Entrepreneurship Development Centre is intended to share our developmental experience – with all the problems faced and successes achieved - with the people of Myanmar.
Myanmar abounds in natural resources, such as gas, minerals, forest products and agro-products.
This Centre aims at creating a pool of entrepreneurs who can transform these resources into marketable commodities, thus enriching themselves and the country as a whole.
I have no doubt that this Centre will spearhead the entrepreneurship development movement in Myanmar and facilitate the creation of viable and competitive new enterprises and new job opportunities.
This Centre will also help existing enterprises to face new challenges of global competition.
I would like to compliment the Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India, entrusted with setting up this Centre, for its professionalism and for a job well done.
I would also like to thank the Government of Myanmar for its help and cooperation in realising this project.
It is with much happiness that I declare this Centre open.
Allow me, at the outset to thank you and your gracious wife for the generosity of your hospitality.
It is but natural that when friends meet, the talks are permeated with a spirit of friendship and mutual understanding.
This was indeed so this afternoon.
We have pledged to work together to strengthen our bilateral relations in the months and years to come.
We share with you a vision of a partnership based on friendship and mutually beneficial cooperation.
The importance of enhancing interaction between North East States of India and Myanmar cannot be overemphasized and you occupy a central place in our “Look East Policy”.
Tomorrow, we shall witness the launching of yet another landmark project - the Myanmar-India Entrepreneurship Development Centre in Yangon.
Excellency Our economic engagement has expanded to embrace both our public and private sectors.
Several positive developments have taken place recently in the areas of trade, investment, power, oil and natural gas, manufacturing, IT and the vocational training sectors.
It was in recognition of this growing engagement that I have brought with me a high level business delegation.
I am happy to participate in the Golden Jubilee Celebrations of the Indian Society of International Law.
The Society’s work has been significant in terms of its scope and impact.
It has fostered the study of international law in the country.
Its publications, with a focus on the concerns of the developing countries of Asia and Africa, have been instrumental in the evolution of some aspects of international law.
International law took shape with the dawning of the realization that anarchy cannot be the operative principle in the community of states.
This necessitated the enunciation of rules.
A third set of rules, of a normative nature, emanated from the ideals developed through interaction.
Over time there has been progress, as Professor Richard Falk put it many years back, from consent to consensus.
While this is an indication of the vitality of international law, it has also led to a certain fragmentation, of conflicting and incompatible principles, rule systems and institutional practices.
Ladies and gentlemen In this 60th year of the Republic, it is relevant to recall that Article 51 of our Constitution exhorts the state to foster respect for international law and treaty obligations.
It is therefore relevant to ask how and where the norms and principles of international law can be invoked to address these questions.
For a variety of reasons, India has not signed or ratified some treaties that are accepted by most members of the international community.
There are a number of instances in which the Indian judiciary has relied upon international conventions and covenants in interpreting constitutional provisions and stating the law where legislation did not exist and where more can be done.
It held the State responsible for significant human rights violations in its jurisdiction, whether committed by State or non-State actors.
Friends, The problems created by the dramatic expansion of the scope and instrumentalities of international law should not blind us to the significant success achieved in ameliorating the welfare of mankind.
International Human Rights and Humanitarian Law have expanded their scope and application to become one of the most comprehensively regulated branches of international law.
A great number of their rules have been recognized as part of customary international law.
Third, alongside the increasing salience of human rights and international humanitarian law, there is a disturbing trend of various types of exclusion being practiced such as particularism, fundamentalism and nationalism that are against the universal humanitarian principles and human rights.
This pattern of behaviour by some states of the international community is not in consonance with the principles of good governance and rule of law, and the purposes and the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
This ranges from armed conflict, regulation of the economy and society including law and order functions, environmental protection, international trade and air transport and even protection of human rights and refugee rights.
The role of non-state actors challenges the traditional framework of international law when they resort to arms, violence and terrorism to achieve their objectives, either within their own state or in other states.
Response patterns to these situations have tended to exhibit disconcerting levels of subjectivity.
The focus of the international community has now shifted to the wider question of comprehensive human security.
International law has followed this trend.
The tension continues between those who extol the virtues of the international legal discourse of the last two decades and those who criticise it citing that its underlying jurisprudential approaches conceal or ignore the deployment of power.
This admittedly would be an erratic and uneven process; it would test our patience and commitment.
Governments, civil society and peoples all over the world have to be prepared to do what is right.
The objective of international law, in the final analysis, is orderly discourse among states for the good of humanity.
In the long run, he added, ‘you cannot expect one without the other’.
It can only be traversed on the basis of moral clarity.
I wish the conference deliberations all success and I thank the Society for inviting me to this function.
Ours is a plural society and a secular polity that has a democratic state structure.
Our rights and freedoms are guaranteed by the Constitution.
Each of these blessings has to be counted, realized, cherished and protected.
Ours is a land whose diversity includes religious minorities.
Every sixth Indian is in this category.
In absolute terms, it amounts to almost 200 million people.
This has impacted on the overall progress of the country.
Experience has shown that the procedures to redress grievances remain somewhat ineffective, principally on account of a lack of will, and tardy responses, from the concerned state agencies.
I hope this meeting would come up with practical solutions to this problem.
The Government, on its part, could consider equipping the NCM with the instrumentality of investigation of the type given to the NHRC and the Commission on Scheduled Castes.
Likewise, the option of legislation similar to ‘The Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989’ could be explored for the minorities.
Ladies and Gentlemen There are three broad and inter-related dimensions to consider while discussing the question of minorities – Identity, Security and Equity.
Issues of identity are always complex, especially in a plural society.
They nevertheless exist.
The Sachar Committee Report shed light on aspects of it pertaining to our Muslim citizens.
Some of this holds good for Christians too.
Both result from a reluctance to imbibe a plural ethos.
Neither is conducive to the idea of India enunciated in the Constitution.
Both need to be contested.
A liberal democracy has to be a tolerant one, accommodative of diversity in word and deed.
Security concerns continue to be a matter of concern in the light of recent and not-so-recent happenings in different parts of the country.
A disturbing aspect of it is the failure of the state to provide security.
Confirmation of this comes from judicial pronouncements.
A corrective can come, as it has in many instances, from public opinion and civil society activism.
More needs to be done on this count.
Reports on other minorities highlight their individual problems.
The policies and programmes initiated in the wake of the Sachar Report are indicative of the corrective action under way.
The key to success lies in close monitoring of the implementation at ground level.
Another Expert Group Report in 2008 suggested the creation of an Equal Opportunity Commission to give shape to the equality jurisprudence of the Constitution and to ensure inclusive growth.
Support for both needs to be galvanized so that it culminates in enabling legislation.
Friends We have traveled a considerable distance in enforcing the human rights of individual citizens.
A similar endeavour in regard to minority rights needs to be made since both form part of the charter of rights.
Rights of minorities have acquired renewed salience in the last two decades.
Ladies and Gentlemen Each one of you has a mandate that goes beyond committees, reports and political debates.
This has to be done in a manner that brings about quantified outcomes in a framework of transparency and accountability.
I am confident that you would address this task in all seriousness.
I thank Shafi Qureshi Saheb, for inviting me to be the Chief Guest today.
I wish the NCM all success in its work.
The occasion has one other significance.
This is the first time that the Festival is being hosted by Punjab and that too in a city whose spiritual aura and place in history is in no need of commentary.
A festival is a festive occasion, generally though not exclusively associated with festivity.
This Festival brings together about 4000 young persons from all parts of our country, and some from abroad, gives them an invaluable opportunity for a few days to live, work and think together.
In doing so, they should recall an observation of Swami Vivekanand.
“The world”, he said, “is the great gymnasium where we come to make ourselves strong”.
Friends India is a nation of young people.
Around 70 percent of our population – about 430 million in absolute terms – consists of those who are below the age of 35.
The future of the country, its hopes, aspirations and achievements, rests with the youth and this demographic asset has to be harnessed for the good of the nation.
It provides an opportunity; it also presents a challenge.
Nor are we alone in our quest for youth power.
The United Nations observed 1985 as the International Youth Year and, in 1999 decided to observe August 12 every year as the International Youth Day.
In October 2008 the UN Secretary General presented a full report on the implementation of the various UN programmes and initiatives for the youth in recent years.
National and international youth gatherings help promote objectives and lead to exchanges of ideas and experiences.
Our national thinking is on somewhat parallel lines.
We are confronting the scourge of terrorism.
It relates to loss of national energy on account of local or parochial perceptions and actions.
We in India live in a plural society and cherish our cultural heritage and its diversity.
This diversity presents itself in terms of regions, languages, religions, food habits and in a multitude of other ways.
The challenge, then, is to think Indian and act Indian within the framework of this unity and diversity.
It is to use Swami Vivekanand’s “gymnasium” to strengthen ourselves mentally and physically for this purpose.
The youth have the flexibility of mind and body to do so.
They must display the will and determination to achieve it.
They should cajole and propel their elders to follow suit.
I congratulate all the young people who have won National Youth Awards today.
I am confident that they would inspire others to emulate them.
Friends Let me conclude with another motto of Swami Vivekanand that may be of help to you: “Take up one idea.
Make that one idea your life.
I am confident that the idea you would select would make you happy and successful, a good citizen of India and of the world of the future.
This distinguished audience today bears testimony to the success of the Foundation in fashioning an alternative paradigm to address of population question, by doing it through the civil society.
It is the affirmation of an equitable, decentralised, rights-based and participative approach to human development, one aspect of which is population stabilization.
Its concomitants are access to affordable health care, education, sanitation, safe drinking water, and empowerment of women.
I take this opportunity to congratulate the Chief Minister of Sikkim and the Health Minister of Chhattisgarh for receiving the 4th JRD Tata Award for Population and Reproductive Health Programmes for the year 2008.
Their performance proves that political will, and a determination to bring about change, is as important as resources.
Ladies and Gentlemen The website of the Foundation displays the population clock.
It also indicates that there are 29 births in India every minute.
This amounts to 41,760 births a day.
Of these 2380 die every day amounting to a mortality rate of 57 per thousand live births.
Such high infant mortality feeds into high wanted fertility, demolishing all efforts at reducing the total fertility rate.
Confronted with these figures, one is propelled to re-visit the National Population Policy 2000 and its layered targets.
The immediate objective of NPP was to address the unmet needs for contraception, health care infrastructure, and health personnel, and provide integrated service delivery for basic reproductive and child health care.
The long-term objective was to achieve a stable population by 2045, at a level consistent with the requirements of sustainable economic growth, social development, and environmental protection.
The total fertility rate is unlikely to reach replacement level before 2015, while some of the laggard and big states would reach that level only after 2021.
The infant mortality rate is unlikely to reach the target of 30 per 1000 live births even by 2025.
The accompanying legislation for making the right to education the fundamental right is still a work in progress, and more than 50 per cent of our children are yet to be fully immunized.
The statistics on maternal healthcare are also not encouraging with over 50 per cent of births not being either institutional deliveries or deliveries by trained persons.
Ladies and gentlemen  This is not to deny our significant achievements.
Since Independence, we have drastically improved overall literacy and female literacy and enhanced life expectancy for our citizens.
As a lay person, I wish to offer two themes for consideration.
First, the demographic map of India is extremely diverse and heterogeneous.
There are significant differences between states in the achievement of basic demographic indices, resulting in disparities population size and growth trends.
There are wide inter-state, male-female and rural-urban disparities in outcomes and impacts.
Over 10 States and Union Territories have achieved replacement levels of fertility.
The growth rates continue to be high in Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan.
Here we see a striking confluence of high fertility rates with low literacy and low health indicators and lower levels of socio-economic development.
These states accounts for 40 per cent of our population and expected to contribute half of our future population growth.
We thus need to focus on these states with renewed vigour, with full coordination between Central and State governments, and active involvement of civil society institutions.
Secondly, more emphasis should be paid to ‘demographic decentralization’ through devolution of responsibilities and resources to the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in formulating and implementing area specific policies and programmes relevant for population stabilization.
They need to be involved in micro-planning and monitoring at local level to improve implementation of the programme and ensure effective community participation.
So far service deliveries under Family Welfare Programmes have been administered entirely through official agencies.
The answer lies in the 73rd and 74th constitutional amendments that created a meaningful role for local self-governance.
The time has come for activating the third tier of government to address the population problem through speedy devolution of financial and human resources and powers.
We need to note that without timely and effective public policy interventions, the demographic asset could turn into an enormous liability.
I once again congratulate the Chhattisgarh and Sikkim for their performance and urge other states to emulate them.
I thank the Population Foundation of India for inviting me as the Chief Guest today.
It is my pleasure to be here at the Republic Day Camp of the National Cadet Corps.
At the outset, I extend my best wishes for a prosperous and bright New Year to all of you.
The National Cadet Corps is the largest uniformed youth organization in the world, bringing together youth hailing from different parts of our country, and moulding them into responsible, disciplined and united citizens of our great nation.
The very ambience of this camp fosters the feeling of camaraderie and patriotism.
This Camp will be a memorable motivating and learning experience for each one of you.
It will give you an opportunity to interact with cadets not only from other parts of the country, but also from friendly foreign countries who will be arriving during the course of this camp.
This will be a unique opportunity not only to understand your country better but also to widen your horizon and foster lasting friendship with fellow cadets from other nations.
This camp will highlight the essence of universal brotherhood transcending national and international boundaries.
Everyday there are few challenges in our society, which we have to tackle as a mature democracy.
Your contribution in times of crisis and natural disasters like earthquakes, cyclone, floods etc has been commended by the nation.
Your efforts will positively improve the social fabric.
It is very encouraging to learn that the initiative that was started by NCC, in collaboration with the UNICEF, in the field of Literacy of Youth, especially the girl child, in the rural and backward areas of the country, is being implemented effectively.
I have full faith that your efforts will bear fruits in the near future.
The National Cadet Corps is a shining example of National Integration and Secularism and you are the pillars of the National Cadet Corps.
It was heartening to learn that all the NCC cadets took the pledge of upholding the spirit of Communal Harmony, on NCC Day 2008.
It is a matter of deep satisfaction that you have excelled in all walks of life.
The encouraging performance of NCC cadets in the field of sports, especially Shooting, is a sure sign of the bright future of our sports in the years ahead.
Today, I urge you to continue with this hard work and discharge your duties with dedication and distinction in the times to come.
I am deeply impressed by your turnout and smart drill and I would like to congratulate you for it.
I have great pleasure in inaugurating the Annual National Cadet Corps Republic Day Camp 2009.
Jai Hind
The last sentence in the book extols the benefits of a rear view mirror.
The process was comprehensively traced a century earlier by Romesh Dutt in his Economic History of India Under the Early British Rule.
Economic deprivation was one aspect of the colonial rule.
More serious was its impact on the minds of the subjugated and on the totality of their existence.
This was summed up by a colonial administrator, Sir Thomas Munro: “he who loses his liberty loses half his virtue.
A European scholar, writing in the year 1853, addressed it and analyzed the ground reality: “The paramount power of the Great Moghuls was broken by the Moghul Viceroys.
The power of the Viceroys was broken by the Mahrattas.
It was at times led by local landlords.
Some of these conflicts involved large numbers but organized military confrontations, of the type with Tipu Sultan of Mysore, were the exception.
Nevertheless, these popular resistance movements continued for almost a century.
The timeline of the progress of British control, and Indian resistance to it, tells its story – battle of Plassey 1757; Sannyasi Rebellion in north Bengal 1763; battle of Buxar 1764; battle of Srirangapatna 1799; the last battle with Marathas 1818-19; the first war of independence 1857.
The struggle for independence to put an end to this slavery is our duty.” This conditioned Muslim perceptions till well after 1857.
In Bengal, the presence of the foreigner induced Rammohan Roy’s introspections to “to reexamine the presuppositions of his own society” and initiate a reformation in the second and third decade of the 19th century.
Demand for freedom of press followed.
Alongside, resentment to foreign rule developed and culminated in the upheaval of 1857 that shook the British rule to its foundations.
It is another matter that it failed in the face of superior military technology and organization.
They also developed newer methods of dissent and protest.
Some years back the National Archives published a collection of poems that were confiscated by government for being seditious.
It gives me great pleasure to be the Chief Guest at the Fourth Convocation of the Chhatrapati Sahuji Maharaj Medical University.
As the first residential medical university in the country, it had performed a pioneering role since its inception almost a century ago.
I take this opportunity to felicitate the students graduating today, and those who have won medals for their academic excellence in specific disciplines of medicine.
Convocation is a ‘rite of passage’ from the academia; for the professionals it also marks their formal entry into a select group having its own ethics, norms and codes of conduct.
In the case of men and women of medicine, the contours of dharma were first indicated in the ancient Oath prescribed in the 4th century BC by the Father of Medicine, Hippocrates of Cos.
In our country, it is undertaken through the Oath stipulated by the Indian Medical Council (Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002.
Its operative clauses are service to humanity, practice of profession with conscience and dignity, and the primacy of the patient’s health.
I would urge you, individually and collectively, to ponder on the import of these pledges and what they would mean to you in your professional life.
II Friends,  We live in changing times.
Rapid economic growth of the past decade has not only lifted many of our people from poverty but also brought about highly uneven access to the fruits of development along multiple dimensions of region, class, community and gender.
Let me illustrate the latter point with reference to public health, and on the authority of the WHO.
The data for Uttar Pradesh from the National Family Health Survey of 2005-06 brings out the following: The life expectancy at birth is 56 years in UP as against 74 years in Kerala.
The meaning of this for the 180 million population of Uttar Pradesh is profoundly disturbing.
These figures have national relevance since Uttar Pradesh is home to one-sixth of our population.
It is to be recalled that the state of health of citizens is a component of the globally and nationally accepted parameters of human development.
Each of these calls for a serious public debate.
There is an imperative need to address this through explicit commitments in policy and programmes.
The focus has to be on reduction in infant mortality.
Secondly, substantial investment in physical infrastructure is imperative.
Over 11 per cent of the population are not able to access medical care due to locational reasons, and even when they do access, there is no guarantee of sustained care.
Only 11 per cent of population of Uttar Pradesh receives antenatal care compared to 85 per cent in Kerala and only 11.3 per cent are institutional deliveries for UP compared to 96.6 per cent for Kerala.
This state of affairs has disastrous consequences for the poor.
There is a high vacancy list in our PHCs and hospitals.
Fourthly, alongside augmentation of physical infrastructure is a compelling need for enhancing the human resources in the health sector.
There is an acute shortage of doctors and paramedics.
UP has 11 medical colleges, and faces a deficit of 24 medical colleges based on the norm of 1 medical college per 50 lakh population.
There are less than 5900 sanctioned posts of nurses for the whole state and over 800 of these remain vacant.
It is estimated that in the next six years, UP would need around 1 lakh nurses.
Fifthly, preventive healthcare must regain the primary focus, with concomitant resource allocation.
Cost effective interventions have been suggested by the National Commission on Macroeconomics and Health in regard to infant mortality, nutrition, tuberculosis, smoking and tobacco use and unsafe sex.
According to the Commission, reduction in childhood mortality may raise the life expectancy at birth of an Indian by over 3 years, and our GDP by over 4 per cent.
Sixthly, we must effectively integrate provision of private sector health services with those provided by the pubic sector.
The Government and the regulators of the health sector and the medical profession have not adequately articulated and assigned useful and practical roles to the private sector as also public duties for private medical professionals.
Industry or professional self-regulation bodies do not exist only for accreditation, setting up standards and for institutional licensing of private health facilities in the country.
This regulatory lacuna must be immediately addressed both at the centre and state levels.
And finally, we must take note of the growing importance of health insurance for various segments of the population.
Central and State Governments are enhancing their support for health insurance coverage in limited geographical and occupational contexts, with some success.
Some of the examples include the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana for BPL card holders, the Rajiv Aarogyasri Community Health Insurance Scheme in Andhra Pradesh and the Yeshasvini Cooperative Farmers Health Insurance Scheme in Karnataka.
Health insurance provides a way of risk pooling and cost sharing among various segments of the population.
While this is not a panacea, Uttar Pradesh could look at the successful experience of other governments and seek to emulate where possible.
V Ladies and Gentlemen I wish to appeal to the students graduating today to ponder over their professional role and the societal expectation of them.
Remember that each one of you matters in the much delayed and arduous task of providing basic healthcare to our citizens.
I wish you professional success, happiness and decades of service to humanity.
I thank His Excellency the Governor for inviting me to this Convocation.
I deem it a privilege to be the Chief Guest today to inaugurate the Birth Centenary Celebrations of Hakim Abdul Hameed Sahib.
Narm dam-e-guftugu, garm dam-e-justujoo  Razm ho ya bazm ho, paak dil o paak-baaz Modesty, practical common sense, and precision of expression characterised the personality of Hakim sahib.
In 1997, he was persuaded to chair an international seminar on the fiftieth anniversary of 1947.
At one point in the inaugural session, he was requested to address the audience.
He declined, saying that he had agreed to chair the session, not to address it!
The Hamdard story begins over a century ago when Hakim Hafiz Abdul Majeed sahib established the Hamdard Dawakhana in 1906.
The vision was implicit in the name.
‘The sharing of pain’ and willingness to mitigate it was to be the motto of the future generations as well.
A traditional system of medicine was thus modernised with a nationalist inspiration and an indigenous base.
For this reason, Hakim sahib can rightly be called a Mujaddid of Unani medicine.
Ladies and Gentlemen Assuming the leadership of the institution at an unusually young age he, as all great men, led by example.
It was his love for education and the welfare of humanity that led him to focus on the Wakf.
It was an important signal in the immediate aftermath of the painful partition of India to thread together the religious element with socio-economic progress and alleviation of poverty.
In the decades since, over 25 educational research institutions were established culminating in the Jamia Hamdard.
The range is astounding – ranging from primary education to post doctoral research, from Unani Medicine to Information Technology, from Islamic Studies to Business Management.
Besides the university, the colleges and hospitals established for service to society, there are a set of institutions that bear testimony to his scholarly interests.
Future generations would behold Jamia Hamdard and Talimabad and wonder at the capacity, vision and dedication of an individual.
I am happy to be here today.
Lifetime achievement awards seek to recognise hard work, dedication and toil of decades.
The kind of leadership and personality characteristics that result in such achievement need to be better understood and disseminated among industry professionals.
I congratulate the awardee companies and their Company Secretaries for upholding the principles of good corporate citizenship and social responsibility.
Dr. Sreedharan is no stranger to us and in the past one year this is probably the third time that I am presenting him an award for his excellence and leadership.
Ladies and Gentlemen A discussion on corporate governance is timely.
The world is in the throes of economic and financial crises of monstrous dimensions.
What began in the financial world has now acutely affected the real economy.
The reasons are not far to seek – a failure of corporate governance and abdication of key responsibilities by the Boards and Managements of the Companies and even by the Rating Agencies and Regulators.
Friends, It would appear that globalisation also extends to the darker niches of our economy, polity and society.
While the decision has been reversed, it highlights the gap between the profession and practice of corporate governance and corporate social responsibility.
Matters are made worse by the fact that the company in question was, quite recently, given a Global Award for Excellence in Corporate Governance!
Investor activism in this case bore fruit because it was a high profile company with many FII and institutional investors.
Such instances, however, routinely happen with smaller companies.
Ladies and gentlemen Every economic framework and political system brings with it its own problems and peculiar characteristics that mark the corporate governance debate.
The debate on corporate governance in the United States and Europe is primarily focused on the disconnect between the management and the share holders.
In India, and in the light of known facts, I would like to draw attention to three aspects of corporate governance.
Firstly, the central problem of corporate governance is the conflict between the dominant share holders and minority share holders.
Some argue that this basic problem cuts across all business enterprises, whether in the private or the public sector.
The Board of Directors of business organisations which derives its power from the dominant share holders has proven to be weak in protecting the interests of minority shareholders.
Secondly, the range of corporate governance instrumentalities that guide the behaviour of business organisations is usually dependent on whether the organisation is listed on the stock markets, and if so, the location of listing.
Listed companies are governed by Securities Law and SEBI Guidelines and Regulations that are far more forward looking in protecting the interests of minority shareholders.
The Revised Clause 49 of the Listing Agreement that is in force since 2006 has incorporated the recommendations made by the Narayana Murthy Committee on Corporate Governance.
Indian companies that are listed in Foreign Stock Exchanges have also to comply with country specific and global codes including the OECD Principles of Corporate Governance and the UN Global Compact Programme.
Thirdly, there appears to be a strong correlation, and possibly causation, between corporate governance failures and the grey economy.
The efforts of the government to root out black money transactions have lessened the incentive for corporate fraud.
Ladies and Gentlemen It is worth recalling that more than any other nation in history, we in India have been at the receiving end of the biggest and most devastating failure of corporate governance in global history.
I refer, of course, to the East India Company.
It governed in the name of trade.
Jawaharlal Nehru called it “pure loot.” Robert Clive and Warren Hastings carried it to such levels that British Parliament was compelled, on the initiative of Edmund Burke, to fashion instrumentalities of corporate governance.
Some of you may also recall that Adam Smith used the East India Company as a case study to argue against monopoly capitalism and for controls on corporate power.
They highlight the imperative need for higher standards of corporate governance, and closer scrutiny of their implementation.
The Institute of Company Secretaries thus has a tough task ahead of it.
I am confident that its members would accomplish it and thereby reiterate their commitment to professional values and excellence.
I once again congratulate the winners of the award today and hope that they would continue to uphold and propagate the virtues of good corporate governance.
It is a privilege for me to be present here today among such a distinguished and discerning audience at the inauguration of the Annual Conference and Concerts of The Music Academy.
The month of December in Chennai is the month of melody.
This not only makes the city the cultural pole star of the country but has sustained and enriched the varied and vibrant musical traditions of India.
The Music Academy has a glorious history and tradition of over eight decades.
It not only covers the theory and practice of music but has undertaken important steps in spreading awareness about various aspects of classical music through its lecture demonstrations and academic discussions.
The city of Chennai, and the Music Academy, needs to be complimented for promoting music over the decades.
Ladies and Gentlemen, To my mind, music does for the soul what yoga does for the body and mathematics for the mind.
Since all traditional belief systems hold the priority of the soul, the centrality of music is beyond dispute.
There is one other point about music that is noteworthy in the Indian context.
It transcends barriers of caste and creed and is a unifying thread.
All sections of our very diverse population have contributed to it, and all enjoy it in equal measure.
Friends   The creativity and spirituality associated with music is well known.
Less appreciated is the linkage between music and technological innovation.
This manifests itself in the development of musical instruments.
The modern age and the technological revolution have given new instrumentalities to understand music, create music and reproduce it.
It has made the task of popularizing music across physical and ethereal media much simpler.
Yet, as all the artists and rasikas in this audience realize, there is never any substitute for hearing music in person in a concert.
The immediacy and spontaneity of a concert can never be replicated by technology.
I once again thank Shri N. Murali for inviting me to inaugurate the Annual Conference and Concerts of The Music Academy.
I also take this opportunity to wish all connoisseurs of music and the artists who would perform during this season many hours of musical bliss.
It is a privilege to be invited to address this gathering, assembled to mark the Centenary of the Indian Institute of Science.
I am grateful to the Institute and Dr. Kasturirangan for this.
We in India have set for ourselves the goal of becoming a knowledge society.
This enhanced level of access to knowledge also implies a heightened awareness of the criticality of fundamentals, of basic research.
I The work of the scientist in relation to the priorities that individual societies set for them is of immense relevance.
Let me illustrate this with reference to India.
In the first decade of independence, the Government set forth their science policy with three objectives:   As is well known, much has been done in the past six decades to create an infrastructure of science and technology and endow it with the potential for advancement.
Many notable landmarks have been reached.
At the same time, significant gaps remain and are hampering achievement of targets.
Allow me take a closer look at some of these.
The first relates to the paucity of scientists.
This may sound paradoxical but is nevertheless reflective of ground reality.
The Prime Minister referred to it in his address to the 2005 session of the Indian Science Congress and this has been amplified in the Report of the Steering Committee on Science and Technology and in the Eleventh Five Year Plan.
The Plan accepts that basic research in science, engineering and medicine is a critical input for development.
It has stressed the need for making available equipment and facilities in colleges and universities, as also the need to create attractive career options for talented young scientists.
The old debate about ‘basic research’, ‘directed basic research’ and applied research and product development surfaced in the Steering Committee Report.
Secondly, attracting young minds to the domain of science is often a matter of igniting interest.
This is best done through inspiring teaching and creation of role models.
There seems to be a disconnect here at two levels: between senior teachers and undergraduates, and between teaching and researchers.
The net result is that the young science student is deprived of contact with sources of inspiration that may fire his/her imagination.
A few years back Jayant Narlikar had pointed out that a panel constituted for the decadal meeting of the Astronomical Society of India, had only one of its 37 members drawn from a university.
The message, he said, was that universities had best confined themselves to teaching while research institutes will look after research!
The Knowledge Commission has now drawn attention to the absence of interconnectivity between educational institutes and R&D laboratories and has suggested ways of bridging the gap.
My third point relates to the methodology of teaching science.
I understand that nearly 50 percent of school students fail in Mathematics and Science.
This would also involve re-training of teachers.
The situation is particularly depressing in state universities where almost 90 percent of students are enrolled.
My last point pertains to innovations and patents in the light of the generally voiced complaint that our national performance on this count is inadequate.
Given our requirements, therefore, capacity building in science is the need of the hour.
Only then would we be able to sustain technological advancement that is imperative for national development.
In a conceptual sense, it necessitates promotion of knowledge about knowledge, its nature and character, its social and ethical content and their implications.
On the way to its goal, science obeys certain laws, the rules of logic and rational reasoning being the most important ones.
By having an impact on reality, scientists automatically and inevitably acquire a responsibility.
Our work will have consequences, which we are not to ignore.
Reflecting on our activities is the main target of ethics.
Therefore, ethical reflection is related to science and to scientific progress.’ This view may be contested but is not altogether isolated.
Two of these are relevant to our argument: the first pertains to rationality and logic; the second to the identity of scientists as moral creatures living in societies.
Neither can be evaded and their connotations need to be probed.
The ancients considered humans as rational creatures.
The process by which they reached this conclusion was somewhat complex.
Aristotle divided the soul into three types: vegetable soul common to plants and animals and concerned only with nourishment and growth, animal soul shared by man and lower animals and concerned with locomotion, and the rational soul or intellect confined to humans.
Thus the process by which unreason is replaced by reason has to be both deliberate and continuous.
The process is one aspect of the matter, content is another.
The teasing question for the men and women of science is the application of this heterodoxy to the social realm.
The State is the keystone of the social arch and the final repository of the will of a society.
The sceptic, on the other hand, draws attention to possible pitfalls.
It was aptly stated by Bertrand Russell.
Since historical record sustains both positions, an enquiring mind is lead to philosophical and practical questions about implications.
This endeavour goes back to Arjuna’s doubts in the debate in Mahabharata.
In our own times, the scientist qua scientist is driven by the logic and impulse of work underway.
Its implications may or may not be immediately discernable.
At the other end of the spectrum, no free society can deny the right to dissent.
The social responsibility of scientists has to be posited within such a framework.
It gives me great pleasure to inaugurate the Second Bangalore Nano 2008, the second edition of one of the largest industry event in the country on nano technology.
It brings together eminent scientists, researchers, academics and industry professionals.
The theme of this event, “Nanotechnology in India's future", is timely and relevant.
The new science and its related technologies focus on the ability to image, measure, model, and manipulate matter on the nanoscale.
Nanoscale science, engineering, and technology promise new materials and applications across many fields.
Realising and exploiting the full potential offered by nanotechnology depends on intensive and broad-based collaborative research.
The Government is aware that capacity-building in this upcoming area of research will be of utmost importance.
As part of the Nano Mission, research on fundamental aspects of Nano Science and training of manpower will receive prime attention.
It will also strive for development of products and processes for national development, especially in areas of national relevance like safe drinking water, drug delivery etc.
The mission would seek to forge linkages between educational and research institutions and industry and promote Public Private Partnerships.
It has been structured to achieve synergy between the national and international collaborative research efforts of various agencies in Nano Science and Technology and launch new programmes in a concerted fashion.
Advanced science and technology is esoteric and probably beyond the comprehension of the man on the street.
However, the impulses for any roadmap or trajectory for scientific and technological research should emanate from public discussion and public participation.
Globally, the majority of existing nano technology related products are tailored to developed country consumer needs.
The challenge is to focus on what nano science and technology can do for the masses of India.
Notwithstanding corporate social responsibility, it is a fact of life that business organisations are accountable to their shareholders.
Second, we need to realise that new and revolutionary technologies always come as a package – with the promise of new opportunities and the threat of new risks.
Those responsible for steering the development of this emerging sector, whether in government, academia or the industry, should understand the potential public health and safety concerns and environmental implications of nanotechnology.
In fact, it would be helpful if a code of conduct for nanoscience and nanotechnologies research could be evolved.
Third, nanotechnologies encompass a wide array of sectors ranging from aerospace to pharmaceuticals, national defence to miniature art.
We need to be prepared to deal with the transformative and even disruptive outcomes of such technologies in our society and face up to the legal and moral dilemmas they may cause.
Ladies and Gentlemen The initiatives in establishing the Research Industry Collaboration Hub (RICH) as a platform to research organizations seeking partnering opportunities with industry, researchers and investors is timely.
Bangalore Nano has also encouraged budding entrepreneurs with business ideas by bringing them face to face with industry professionals and Venture Capitalists on a common platform to facilitate networking and business interactions.
We need more such fora in the country for various industry and research sectors.
I wish Bangalore Nano all success and take this opportunity to once again thank all of you for your patient hearing.
I feel privileged to participate in the ceremony today to present the National Awards.
It has been a humbling experience and a lesson on what human spirit can do.
The awards presented today have a forty year history of recognizing the contributions of those who have made a difference in the empowerment of the persons with disabilities.
Ladies and Gentlemen  It is estimated that there are approximately 650 million persons with disability worldwide, constituting roughly 10 per cent of the global population.
Around 80 per cent of these persons live in developing countries.
The World Bank estimates that 20 per cent of the world’s poorest people, who live on less than one dollar a day, are persons with disabilities.
Contrast this global picture with available national statistics.
Compare this with figures of 20 per cent for Australia and New Zealand, and in our neighbourhood, 7 per cent for Sri Lanka, 6.3 per cent for China and 5.6 per cent for Bangladesh.
As we can see, the first major battle is to accurately and credibly define disability.
The legal framework regarding persons with disabilities begins with the Constitutional mandate of equality, freedom, justice and dignity for all individuals.
Article 41 of the Constitution mandates the State to make effective provisions for securing the right to work, education and to public assistance in case of disablement, subject to the limits of the economic capacity and development of the State.
We have also enacted the Persons with Disabilities Act of 1995 and brought in a comprehensive National Policy for Persons with Disabilities in 2006.
If only we had ensured implementation in this period, facilities required for the disabled would have been available in a significant number.
Today, even our urban and metropolitan spaces continue to constrain persons with disabilities.
I may add there are excellent exceptions also.
As a beginning, we should resolve to ensure that every government facility that caters to persons with disabilities should enjoy a barrier free environment.
Ladies and Gentlemen   The need of the hour is marrying fundamental and human rights with social justice and development goals.
It needs to be part of all programmes, policies and legislation with the objective to achieve equality in all political, economic and social spheres.
It cannot remain confined to the government alone.
It must bring in all stakeholders including civil society, international organizations and even the private sector and media within a cooperative framework for empowering persons with disabilities.
The National Policy for Persons with Disabilities recognizes that such persons are valuable human resource for the country.
We need not reinvent the wheel.
All we need to do is to realize the objectives of our legal and policy framework and include persons with disabilities in all aspects of our development and social justice programming.
I once again congratulate the winners of this year’s National Awards and thank Minister Meira Kumar for inviting me to this function today.
I am happy to be here today to participate in honouring a great son of Panipat.
Altaf Hussain Hali was an eminent scholar who added new dimensions to Urdu literature.
He was a pioneer of social and educational advancement amongst Muslims of India.
Hali lived in troubled times.
He witnessed the loss of freedom, the subjugation of India to the British rule, and the totality of its implications for society.
Hali was associated with Syed Ahmad Khan and the Aligarh Movement.
His views on education are best reflected in his 1907 address to the annual session of the All India Muslim Educational Conference.
He identified the relevance of modern education to employment and urged the Muslims to make their own efforts to redress the situation.
He advised Muslim youth not to confine their quest to government jobs but to seek expression of their talent and genius in crafts and in technical education.
This piece of advice is as relevant today as it was a hundred years back.
It gives me great pleasure to inaugurate the 28th India International Trade Fair.
As country’s premier platform, the IIFT brings together a wide array of Indian business and industry, foreign business delegations and large numbers of the general public.
It is significant that in this edition of the Trade Fair, Pakistan has been accorded ‘Partner Country’ Status and ASEAN the ‘Focus Region’ Status.
This is significant in view of the economic orientation of our Look East Policy and our desire to enhance trade with our neighbours in the SAARC region.
I welcome the foreign business delegations present here and invite them to feel the dynamism and entrepreneurship in the country today.
The Fair has for over two decades provided a single venue outlet for showcasing the potential and achievements of the States and Union Territories in various fields.
Besides business and industry, traditional crafts have attracted attention through the Fair.
This year Orissa is the Partner State and Kerala, the Focus State.
They reflect aspects of the cultural diversity of India besides being important destinations for trade and investment.
Governments across the world are attempting to coordinate steps to contain it.
Fire fighting alone, however, would not suffice.
Prime Minister Manmohan Singh has stressed the need for “a global monitoring authority to promote global supervision and cooperation”.
He has also urged the developed world not to ignore the interest of the developing countries.
The crisis has not left India untouched and poses new challenges.
Amongst other things, it adds a sense of urgency to greater regional cooperation and trade.
I am given to understand that the themes for the present Trade Fair are Infrastructure and Women’s Empowerment.
In the area of economic infrastructure the constraints are patent in electricity, irrigation and drinking water, road and rail transportation, urban and rural economic infrastructure”.
The same holds for women’s empowerment.
Women constitute half the population and must be equal partners in all aspects of national activity.
Ladies and Gentlemen  India is a safe, secure and profitable trade and investment destination.
I hope the foreign business delegations here today take back impressions of the Fair and see India as a hub for high technology R&D, manufacturing, and for services.
I am confident that the Trade Fair would continue to play its proactive role in catalysing trade, investment and technology transfer.
I urge Indian business and industry to augment ITPO’s efforts in this regard.
I thank the ITPO for inviting me to inaugurate the Trade Fair.
I wish all success to the many participants from India and abroad.
I am happy to be here for the inauguration of the 19th National Convention on Knowledge, Library and Information Networking (NACLIN 2016) organized jointly by the Tezpur University and Developing Library Network, New Delhi.
I can also testify to the efficacy of DELNET, a path breaking effort made in 1988 at the India International Centre Library, New Delhi.
It is now supported by the National Informatics Centre of our Ministry of Communications and Information Technology and the Ministry of Culture.
DELNET was established with the prime objective of promoting resource sharing among the libraries through the development of a network of libraries.
It aims to collect, store, and disseminate information besides offering computerised services to users.
It has become an invaluable tool in promoting quicker access to information.
The theme of this conference, “Smart Libraries and Inspired Librarians: Managing New Technologies, Digital Content and Services” visualises the future of libraries and the role of librarians.
This audience knows well that with the advent of the internet the library is no longer a physical ‘place’, but has been transformed into a placeless resource.
The internet not only accelerates the pace of knowledge dissemination, but also gives rise to changing conceptions of knowledge production and use.
Knowledge has been transformed from objective and certain to subjective and personal.
The advent of high speed mobile internet has facilitated networked information and altered the learning venues and expectations.
Social networks and social media have become more important in people’s learning strategies.
Libraries must transform and avail these opportunities to remain vital forces of knowledge dissemination in the years ahead.
These, according to one assessment1, would imply:   We are living in the information age.
This implies that the main sector of economic productivity is changing from agriculture and manufacturing to creation and processing of information and knowledge.
In this context, the libraries have the obligation to act as equalizers.
Libraries of the 21st century can thus help fight poverty and narrow the gap between rich and poor.
This was summed up by UNESCO in 1994 and remains valid today:“Freedom, Prosperity and the Development of society and individuals are fundamental human values.
They will only be attained through the ability of well-informed citizens to exercise their democratic rights and to play an active role in society.
Constructive participation and the development of democracy depend on satisfactory education as well as on free and unlimited access to knowledge, thought, culture and information.
The public library, the local gateway to knowledge, provides a basic condition for lifelong learning, independent decision-making and cultural development of the individual and social groups5.” I thank you for inviting me and wish you successful deliberation.
Jai Hind.
This is a substantive book, authoritative and densely written with 158 pages of text and 875 end notes.
Its subject can only be described as deadly serious.
Professor Karnad, who needs no introduction to the strategic community, has done it with the same thoroughness that characterised his earlier tome, published in 2002.
It will certainly provoke debate.
There has been and continues to be a good deal of informed, and even more uninformed, discussion on nuclear weapons in the global context.
In the vocabulary of economics, a monopoly of possession gave way to an oligopoly.
It resulted in a set of rules emanating from the game theory.
The assumptions and rules were disturbed when the nuclear weapons debate developed a regional context.
The new arrivals, however, developed their own game theory.
The theological certitude of an earlier era has now given way to doubt in some quarters.
A third dimension however was bound to emerge, and did.
I find the scenario disturbing in terms of its assumptions.
The first of these relates to the doctrine of nuclear deterrence.
Possession generates the impulse to further develop, and modernise, existing stock piles.
This necessarily has a reaction leading to escalation.
Secondly, the emergence of actual or potential regional nuclear weapon powers is a reality.
Each case has an impulse and a calculus of its own.
Containment carries in itself the germs of a breakout, resulting in proliferation.
It may thus result in the opposite of what is intended.
Thirdly, the conclusions about decision-making by the political leaders in a democracy are far too sweeping to be relevant.
Competence or lack of it has a wider rationale and is not to be associated with a particular type of leadership.
Democracies can be competent or incompetent; so can dictatorships including military dictatorships.
Enough examples from recent and not-so-recent history can be cited for both types of situations.
No segment of society has a monopoly of wisdom.
Successful societies have invariably been examples of cooperative harmony.
Fourthly, the propensity to identify potential military adversaries has wider implications and, to my mind, should be eschewed.
What Heraclitus said on flux has to be kept in mind.
States have interests, not friends or enemies.
These interests can be adjusted and reconciled.
Finally, the impact of globalisation on national security needs to be factored in.
It affects state capacity and autonomy.
We are currently witnessing the consequences of financial globalisation.
III No discussion on national security can be uni-dimensional.
The rationale for military security and weapons systems is one aspect of the matter.
The real debate today is about human security and about non-military threats.
Many of these are trans-national.
The challenge is to develop both a psychological propensity and technological capability to respond to the latter.
Would this not be a relevant priority for the strategist as the 21st century and its threats unfold?
I feel privileged to be here amidst such a distinguished audience.
Over the years the IDSA has provided the impulse for such gatherings of scholars and analysts.
The end products add to the compendium of knowledge.
The attention of this conference, I understand, would be on dimensions of change in South Asia and its possible implications.
The logic of geography is compelling.
For India, the neighbourhood radiates in concentric circles, buttressed by history, cultural affinities and economic necessities.
Our political commitment to closer ties with our neighbours in South Asia is serious.
The theme of this seminar is twofold: security and regional cooperation.
Both need to be understood in themselves as also in their mutual relationship.
Their logical manifestations could be (1) security exclusively in national terms (2) regional security cooperation (3) regional economic cooperation and (4) a mix of all these resulting in comprehensive security.
At a later stage, frameworks for communication and dialogue emerged.
Each of these was experimented with; results varied from region to region.
Regional economic cooperation has tended to be influenced by a set of factors relating to intra-regional relations and convergence of political interests and cultural compatibility.
The potential for economic cooperation is stymied when historic fears cloud security perceptions.
II South Asia presents a varied picture towards the end of 2008.
In some areas, forces of change are resonating noticeably.
Bhutan has opted for a new system of governance through a constitutional monarchy.
Change is the message of the election in Maldives last week.
Nepal has witnessed historic transition from a monarchy to a democratic republic with a new leadership, and a new constitution in the offing.
Pakistan has reverted to civilian rule with a new Parliament and a democratically elected President.
Less specific are the readings on Bangladesh and Sri Lanka.
The former seeks a return to constitutional democracy and the latter an end to internecine strife.
The conflict in Afghanistan remains a source of considerable concern and calls for innovative solutions premised on national unity.
India, having registered rapid growth in recent years, is itself moving into a period of state and national elections.
Human Development indices of most countries of South Asia are not flattering and it would a miracle if the targets of the Millennium Development Goals are achieved.
Yet, economic growth has continued as most of the South Asian countries have liberalised and moved towards market economies.
Regional cooperation has made headway within the framework of SAARC which itself has expanded to include Afghanistan as well as nine observers.
Governments today do not control information or patterns of human interaction.
Across the region, we see a web of connectivities between political actors, media centres, civil society organisations and commercial entities.
Common people freely exchange views and ideas on their governments and their lives.
First, there is recognition of the importance of good relations with India and an advocacy for closer economic and political relations.
There is also a desire for updating, where relevant, the existing instrumentalities of such cooperation to reflect the new ground level realities.
The question for renegotiating existing treaties has been raised in this context.
Second, India on its part has tried - incrementally and non-reciprocally - to incentivise economic cooperation through confidence building measures.
As a result, some in our neighbourhood have begun to feel that a prosperous and economically vibrant India is an opportunity for them to reap both economic and political benefits.
Third, political elites are increasingly emphasising that the desired economic outcomes transcend investments, growth or development.
Fourth, all countries in South Asia realise that globalisation would be meaningless without the improvement of intra-regional connectivities.
These include security concerns such as terrorism, drug-trafficking and money laundering, as well as economic and developmental issues such as food, water, climate change and energy security.
Some initiatives need to be mentioned.
India has taken the lead in building infrastructure for intra-regional trade in the full knowledge that the economic importance of intra-regional trade is considerable for the smaller regional economies.
Taking the theme of connectivity forward, the SAARC Transport Ministers identified specific corridors for implementation linking Nepal, Bhutan, India and Bangladesh.
A draft Motor Vehicles Agreement and a draft Railway Agreement are also being negotiated.
The expectation is that cross-border trucking and container movements, improved regional air and rail links and upgraded customs and trade facilitation would knit our neighbourhood in a network of mutually beneficial economic partnerships contributing to long term political and social stability.
Two instances of these lie in (i) rivers and flood control; and (ii) energy generation, energy trade and energy transit.
Both are critical to the achievement of development goals of the countries of South Asia.
Experience elsewhere in the world shows that political constraints need not be permanent barriers to economic cooperation and that the latter could help create a climate of opinion to resolve conflicts.
III Ladies and Gentlemen  We live in times of great change.
The challenges we confront overflow national frontiers.
The public in South Asia has, in diverse ways, signalled its impatience with the politics of the status quo.
This is most evident in the younger generation.
It is now for the governments to think innovatively and encapsulate this impulse in national policies.
History is witness to occasions when bold thinking has led to creativity.
The analyst should go beyond identifying the obstacles and pitfalls to suggesting solutions.
I venture to hope that today’s conclave would be part of such an effort.
I thank Mr. Sisodia for inviting me today.
I wish the Seminar all success.
It is a truism that nature is endowed with diversity.
One dimension of it is human diversity that takes the shape, amidst other manifestations, of varieties of experiences, faiths and belief systems.
Faith has been defined as belief in the trustworthiness of an idea.
The basis of this belief may be physical or metaphysical.
Given the richness of human experience in space and time, the manifestations of faith have been equally diverse.
One consequence of this is the emergence of similarities as well as divergences of perceptions.
The human being is a social animal and normally lives in society of fellow humans.
In such a framework, the potential of contestation becomes unavoidable.
This has practical implications.
One aspect pertains to the State.
It suggests that diversity of faiths necessitates proactive initiatives aimed at expanding the areas of comprehension and reducing misunderstandings.
An essential pre-requisite is the acceptance of the validity of spiritual experience of all.
Friends  The world we live in is characterised by the shrinking of spaces.
Isolation and exclusivity are matters of the past.
In fact, the ‘Other’ has increasingly and unavoidably become a part of the Self.
This larger Self, therefore, needs to be understood and accommodated in our perception and practice.
It is here that the Interfaith Movement has a role to play.
This is being understood globally.
The 2002 Millennium World Peace Summit of Religious and Spiritual Leaders spelt out its basic principles.
These need to be furthered.
A critical role in this will be played by inculcating its values in the educational system.
Only this can provide the right type of nourishment to the mind.
A global movement is a good thing.
It is, however, no substitute for national efforts.
Nowhere is this more relevant than in our own society.
Amartya Sen has written about the long history of the argumentative tradition in India and, as he put it, ‘its relative neglect in ongoing cultural discussions’.
I can do no better than to cite his argument: ‘The contemporary relevance of the dialogic tradition and of the acceptance of heterodoxy is hard to exaggerate.
Discussions and arguments are critically important for democracy and public reasoning.
Its success would lie in widening the ambit of its adherents, and their acceptance of it as an imperative necessity.
I may, in the end, add a corrective and a caution.
Indian history is full of instances of dialogues initiated by rulers.
Good examples of these are emperors Asoka and Akbar.
This process of assistance begins in schools but cannot succeed unless it is imbibed by the society as a whole.
I wish you success in your work.
This is home coming and therefore in no need of ceremony.
Today however is a special occasion and I am grateful to the University for having invited me to it.
It was the occasion to honour the memory of the Founder of this great institution.
For this reason, and on the morrow of Sir Syed Day, it is time to recall the message of Syed Ahmad Khan, do some introspection, some cost accountancy.
This included inculcating a spirit of rational thinking and scientific enquiry.
The results of that failure are evident and in no need of elaboration.
Let me be specific: All this happened while the pace of change in modern India gathered a new momentum.
To participate in this exciting venture, relevant education became a pre-requisite.
Friends  Much is happening nationally in the field of education.
The requirement of a knowledge society, however, is yet to be met.
Our Gross Enrolment Ratio in higher education remains at 11 percent and compares poorly with China’s 22 percent and 54.6 percent of the developed world.
For many of us, however, this is not the university in which we spent our youth.
We live in fast changing times.
The AMU of yesteryears had lesser numbers, greater space, fewer pressures.
On each count today, the situation has worsened.
This has impacted adversely on the output in diverse ways and has become a matter of concern.
Innovative thinking, rather than nostalgia, is the call of the hour.
Funding by the Government takes care of salaries, pensions and normal expenses of the University.
This is substantial but leaves insufficient amounts for developmental purposes – for re-equipping of laboratories, opening of new courses, up-gradation of facilities, construction of new hostels etc.
Infrastructure is one aspect of a new agenda.
More important is the quality of the intake and the crafting and content of courses.
AMU needs to respond to the challenges of the 21st century, of a knowledge society and of a globalising world.
Some of what is taught, and the way it is taught, has become irrelevant.
Reorientation of courses of study and of the methodology of teaching has become a necessity.
At the same time, the hallmark of a good university remains the quality of research undertaken by its scholars.
To further the frontiers of knowledge, it must retain a balance between theoretical and applied research.
These need to be rectified expeditiously.
III Within the ambit of a university, the specific requirements of higher education, professional education and distant education have to be met.
None can be neglected.
An imbalance between the two would be detrimental to the institution and a loss to the society.
I wish this conclave success in its deliberations.
Only then would it be said with conviction:
Law was not my calling and the little I know of it is in the context of political philosophy.
It was Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes who described law as the calling of thinkers rather than of artists or poets.
Justice Ahmadi, like other great judges, would have done so aided by lifelong experience.
Of particular interest are the essays pertaining to Fundamental Rights.
Some feel that rights are bestowed and therefore at the mercy of the giver.
Such a trend poisons the public mind and creates misapprehensions about the Indian polity.
For this reason, the basic tenets of our Constitutional faith need to be reiterated.
The sectional problem thus becomes a national one.
Justice Ahmadi has done a national service by dwelling on them.
Thank you.
Dr. Mohinder Singh has produced a commendable work and I am honoured to be here this afternoon to participate in its unveiling.
My friend Professor Amrik Singh sahib had much to do with it, and I cannot but thank him profusely.
Some rare and excellent photographs add to it.
In one sense, it is an excellent introduction to the Sikh faith.
The Foundation for Punjab Studies and the publishers are to be complemented.
Ladies and gentlemen  The teachings of every great religious guide in history exhibit two essential traits: firstly, the simplicity and universality of the message and secondly the capacity to teach by personal example.
This was true of Guru Nanak Dev.
Every teacher in history also responded to the challenges of his age.
Guru Nanak ji commented on the northern India of late 15th century: ‘The age is like a knife.
Kings are butchers.
Religion hath taken wing and flown.
This, by itself, created a vast space for imbibing, refining and promoting the wisdom of the ages.
The community at Kartarpur gave a practical shape to these teachings.
The model remains operational to this day.
These simple lessons have universal validity.
Today’s gathering, ladies and gentlemen, reminds us of the imperative need to recall and reiterate the basic purpose of human existence and of all teachings that underline the essential unity of faiths.
Thank you.
This gathering has brought together decision makers from the government and corporate sector from India and abroad.
The deliberations of this conference would thus be of relevance.
Ladies and Gentlemen  Modern civilization has been founded and furthered on the development of different forms of energy.
This would be true of India also as we endeavour in the coming decades to attain our development objectives.
The ‘Energy for Development’ debate is and must be multi-dimensional.
Access to energy and security of supply is one aspect of it; availability of energy to all segments of society is another.
A third consideration is energy conservation and environmental sustainability.
Your conference will devote much time to all aspects of the development of the hydrocarbon sector.
Demand management, on the other hand, is more difficult.
It should include improved energy efficiency and lower energy intensity of GDP growth, and recognise that relative fuel prices ought to lead to the correct choice of fuel, energy form and technology.
As the Parikh Committee noted, crucial social objectives of the State should ideally be met through direct transfers.
It has recently been estimated by Morgan Stanley that half of the world’s population enjoys fuel subsidies.
In effect, this means that a quarter of the world’s petrol is sold at less than the market price.
Fuel subsidies are politically sensitive and have adverse consequences for government finances and the efficiency of energy use.
All stakeholders therefore need to enquire if fuel subsidies are the most efficient way to protect the poor and vulnerable households.
Thus universal and undifferentiated subsidies for petrol, diesel and LPG imply a substantial leakage of benefits to higher income groups.
The ideal however is not always possible.
This is as yet lacking.
III Energy security is intricately linked to energy conservation.
Infrastructure projects in the energy sector require long gestation periods and heavy capital outlays.
This has not been achieved until now.
We currently consume 0.16 kg of oil equivalent per dollar of GDP in purchasing power parity terms.
The Energy Conservation Act of 2001 provides a legal mandate for implementing energy efficiency measures and it is anticipated that they would result in a saving of 10,000 Megawatts by the end of the 11th Five Year Plan in 2012.
It is to be noted that the global average on this count is around 28 percent.
IV Finally, we come to the role of the renewable segment in the energy mix of the country.
This, at present, accounts for 6.8 percent of primary energy consumption.
According to the International Energy Outlook 2008, most of the growth in renewable energy consumption in developing countries over the next 25 years is expected to come from hydropower.
In the case of India, this would require new approaches to regional cooperation.
This audience is aware that the government has ambitious programmes underway to utilize renewable energy.
The New and Renewable Energy Policy 2005 promotes utilisation of renewable energy sources through indigenous design, development and manufacture.
This includes use of wind energy and solar energy for power generation.
The government has recently declared the National Policy on Bio-fuels that aims to raise blending of bio fuels with petrol and diesel to 20% by the year 2017.
In the first place, most of the renewable energy systems are proving to be land intensive.
This is particularly true of bio-diesel blending and of solar thermal electric generation.
Such vast tracts of land may be difficult to acquire in our country.
econdly, many renewable energy projects are facing problems of grid capacity in transporting renewable energy from areas of production to areas of consumption.
Ladies and Gentlemen The direct correlation between energy use and human development is well established.
Our goal must remain to improve access to reliable, affordable, economically viable, socially acceptable and environmentally sustainable energy sources.
We have no choice but to increase per capita energy consumption to provide to our citizens a minimum acceptable level of well being and welfare.
I thank Dr. Pachauri for inviting me to inaugurate this Conference.
At the same time, the subject of this conclave is factually and figuratively a part of our being and therefore inseparable from human condition and human health.
Human society articulates itself in words and expressions.
One such word is ‘deformity’.
Its connotation, in terms of its dictionary meaning and public usage, is altogether negative and fearsome.
Since ancient times and in different cultures, it was attributed to superhuman causation.
As a result, today it is possible to straighten a crooked spine through surgical intervention.
Today’s conference, therefore, is to be welcomed.
It brings together over 300 spine surgeons and researchers from different lands.
It would help the participants exchange experiences and thereby contribute to the advancement of knowledge.
I understand that it is for the first time such a conference is being held in India.
The organisers from AIIMS and the Indian chapter of the Scoliosis Research Society need to be congratulated for this commendable effort.
It is one more instance of the recognition of India as a country with substantial capacity to deliver specialised medical and surgical treatment.
This is a matter of satisfaction.
I wish the conference success in its work of service to humanity.
Rector Andras Lanczi and the faculty of Corvinus University,    Distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen  I am happy to be in this historic city and in this temple of learning.
Hungry and Hungarian scholars and travellers are well known in India.
Foremost among them was Alexander Cosma de Koros.
The Asiatic Society in Kolkata is proud of his association with it and has published many of his research works.
His tomb in Darjeeling is a monument protected by the Archaeological Survey of India.
The gratitude of the Hungarian people was publicly acknowledged by President Arpad Goncz on his visit to India in 1991.
Hungary’s journey to modern democracy took several decades after 1956 and commenced only in 1990.
As a form of government for the people and by the people, each nation’s experience is sui generis.
India commenced this journey many decades earlier and I feel it may be of some use to share our perceptions, and experience, with this young audience.
India attained its freedom from British colonial rule after a long struggle.
A word about the nature of Indian society is relevant to contextualize this discussion.
Our population of 1.27 billion comprises of over 4,635 communities 78 percent of whom are not only linguistic and cultural but social categories.
Religious minorities constitute 19.4 percent of the population.
Much of this is reflective of our cultural past.
Indian culture is syncretic in character and, as a historian put it, ‘embraces in its orbit beliefs, customs, rites, institutions, arts, religions and philosophies belonging to different strata of societies in varying stages of development.
The national movement recognised this cultural plurality and sought to base a national identity on it.
Thus well before the actual attainment of freedom on August 15, 1947, our people were prepared psychologically and ideologically for self rule in a democratic format.
This was spelt out in the Objectives Resolution of December 1946 stipulating that all power and authority of independent India shall be derived from the people and would guarantee some basic rights to citizens.
The principles enunciated in this document were amplified in the Constitution of India in November 1949 and made operative in January 1950.
It stipulated universal adult franchise.
Its basic principles were summed up in a brief and pithy form in the Preamble; its sections on Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State Policy made it a socio-economic manifesto.
In other words the superstructure of a democratic polity and a secular state structure, put in place in modern India, is anchored in the existential reality of a plural society.
The first General election was held in 1951.
173 million citizens were qualified to vote; of these, 44.87 percent exercised their franchise.
1874 candidates belonging to different national and regional parties contested.
The number of contestants was 8,251.
Since 2004, votes are recorded through EVMs or electronic voting machines.
These are manufactured in India and their accuracy and secrecy has been fully tested.
Our people at all levels of society have imbibed the democratic process enthusiastically and, through amendments to the Constitution in 1992 extended it to municipalities and village councils or  Panchayats.
The democratic process has brought about a shift of political power from the middle and higher castes and classes of urban society to backward classes who are now the politically most influential ones in the country.
This is one more example of the miracles that democracy can create4.
So there is much to celebrate, much to be proud of.
These, in India’s case, are inscribed in the Preamble and the text of the Constitution.
"They were amplified in the concluding statement of Bhimrao Ambedkar, the man who chaired the drafting committee:         ‘On the 26th of January 1950, we are going to enter into a life			 of contradictions."
"In politics we will have equality and in				 social and economic life we will have inequality."
"In politics			 we will be recognising the principle of one man one vote and			 one vote one value."
"In our social and economic life, we shall,			 by reason of our social and economic structure, continue to			 deny the principle of one man one value."
The government accords it high priority in its socio-economic policies.
The pace of its realization remains a matter of debate.
The mechanics of the functioning of our electoral system has been the subject of critical scrutiny for many years pursuant to a realization that aberrations have crept in.
In 2011 the Supreme Court of India directed the Law Commission, an expert body charged with the responsibility of proposing legal reforms, to suggest correctives on two of the identified malpractices6.
In the 2014 general election, only 117 of the 539 winning candidates in the House of the People secured 50% or more of the votes cast.
This in the context of the overall national voting percentage of 66.4% makes evident the actual representativeness of the elected Member of Parliament.
One study shows that it was 31percent9.
This is accentuated by the unequal presence of the weaker sections especially women and minorities.
Among other challenges in the path to a more comprehensive democracy is the question of gender balance.
Women MPs constitute only 11 percent of the total in the House of People elected in 2014.
Some but not all of the religious minorities are in the same position.
Though gender equality has been ensured through legislation in municipalities and village panchayats, the same has not yet been done for Parliament and State assemblies.
Another paradox needs to be mentioned.
Record shows that while the public participation in the electoral exercise has noticeably improved, public dissatisfaction from the functioning of elected bodies is breeding cynicism with the democratic process itself.
It is evident that the quest for improvements will continue with the growth of public awareness of the electoral process.
The impulses and processes generated by these movements add vigour to Indian democracy.
Thank you.
This book is living history at its best.
For this reason alone, it is invaluable.
It is also a profoundly disturbing book.
It reinforces the view that we are still in the process of learning about the momentous events relating to J&K in the early years of our independence.
There are snippets of information that help a reader understand a shade better the role of the principal actors.
There are insights which are invaluable.
Some of the events mentioned and documented in the book have a contemporary relevance.
Sheikh Abdullah gave vent to his sentiments in the speech of July 31, 1952 and Nehru stated the Indian position in his long letter of June 1953.
The first relates to the pre-August 1947 period in which the focus of the struggle of people of the Valley was not against the British but against the Maharaja’s rule.
Even a serious book on a serious subject recounts some humourous episodes.
The second we have on the authority of Foreign Secretary Gundavia; it relates to a discussion in early 1964 between Nehru and his Director of Intelligence Bureau.
We live in an age of contamination: of environment, food, water and of most other ingredients essential to human existence.
For this reason this seminar, focused on one aspect of it, is of immense relevance to our individual and collective wellbeing.
I am therefore happy to be here today to inaugurate it.
There is one other reason evoking our interest in the matter.
Food safety goes beyond cheating on ingredients.
It has been a matter of concern in all ages.
Kautalya’s Arthashastra has a section on the control of butchers and prescribes punishment for selling bad meat or fish.
Then and until the advent of the modern age, man-made contaminants were not a serious factor.
Today, it is a matter of growing national and global concern.
Laws regulating the quality of food have been in force in India since 1899.
The deterrents in it were found to be inadequate.
Subsequent amendments have made punishments more stringent and empowered Consumers and Voluntary Organisations to play a more effective role in its implementation.
The government has taken measures to prevent the indiscriminate use of pesticides and fertilizers in agriculture.
The use of DDT in agriculture was banned in 1996 and that of Lindane in 1997.
Pesticide use has significantly declined from 75 thousand tonnes in 1990 to around 40 thousand tonnes in 2005.
This has meant a corresponding decline in pesticide residues in food items.
Dr. Hasnain pointed out it is not enough.
In August 2006 Parliament enacted the Food Safety and Standards Act to eventually replace all existing laws on the subject.
It is the expectation of all stakeholders that this Authority will streamline and strengthen activities related to food safety standards and enforcement and ensure that food safety is integrally linked to the health of our people.
Exports of agricultural products every year are around US$ 300 billion, of which 45% originates in developing countries.
After signing of the SPS and TBT agreements by India and removal of quantitative restrictions on import of food products into India, the government has initiated harmonization of standards for food products, use of food additives and harmonization of regulations in line with international standards.
The Ministry of Food Processing Industries has declared the current year as ‘Food Safety and Quality Standard Year’ with the objective of bringing together the various initiatives of Central and State governments, Industry Associations and Civil Society Organisations.
A significant initiative in this regard would be the certification of 10 thousand farmers across the country for ‘Good Agricultural Practices’ and for Organic Food.
This would improve the value accrued from agricultural and horticultural produce from the certified farms.
In the final analysis, it is important to involve the public through consumer organisations and civil society groups in these discussions.
I hope that the deliberations of this Seminar would contribute to the ultimate objective of ensuring the food and nutritional security of our citizens.
It gives me great pleasure to inaugurate the 15th Triennial Conference of the Committee for Conservation of the International Council of Museums.
It brings together a distinguished audience from all branches of the museum and the conservation profession.
This is the first ever Triennial Conference to be held in Asia and I welcome those who are in India for the first time.
Conservation is a science as much as it is an art.
Its inextricable linkage to history is evident.
This, fortunately, is happening in our generation.
Conservation has now become a worldwide movement and is propelled by a desire to share experience and learn from it.
Restoration and conservation thus preserve the very objects that serve as our link to the past and as a key to the structuring of our future.
We live in a world where tangible and intangible heritage of humankind are under threat.
Population growth, urbanization and modernization have made the task difficult; national and international strife and conflict have compounded it.
Cultural heritage has also become a platform for contestation between communities and ideologies.
It has been used to legitimise political agendas, stake claims to homelands and to assert the antiquity of groupings.
The theme of this Conference “Diversity in Heritage Conservation: Tradition, Innovation and Participation” is thus very apt.
It is also significant that the Conference would look into ways and means to allow participation of non-professionals, owners and users in heritage conservations decisions.
Increasingly societies the world over are also seeing the value of conserving cultural property for the many associated economic benefits.
Museums, libraries, national galleries and archives are a major contributor to the creative and tourist economy, are powerful places of social learning, promote creativity and innovation and immensely enrich our lives.
We in India have a continuity of history and culture that is unique.
It also poses difficult choices.
Conservation and preservation is therefore a compelling imperative.
Nor is it altogether new.
The need to conserve cultural heritage is advocated in classical Sanskrit literature.
In modern times awareness of this dawned early in the 19th century and a series of laws enacted in the British period laid the foundation of a systematic approach to the question.
This has been built upon in recent decades.
We now have a number of national institutions dedicating themselves to different aspects of this work.
It is significant that heritage conservation has transcended object-oriented museums to include innovative and thematic museums.
The Parliament Museum in New Delhi is an interactive story-telling museum on Democratic Heritage in India spanning 2500 years of Indian history of democracy and has performed a significant educational and advocacy role among citizens.
It has become a good example where a museum is not only for learning but has also emerged as an agent of social change.
Learning from each other’s expertise is essential in the task of conservation because, in the ultimate analysis, this is our common inheritance.
I thank Minister Ambika Soni Ji for inviting me today.
I wish the Conference success in its work.
It gives me immense pleasure to be here today on my first visit to Tamil Nadu.
I thank my friend Mani Shankar Aiyar and Gill Saheb for inviting me today to inaugurate the Rajiv Gandhi Special Area Games Centre.
It is entirely befitting that this sports centre should be named after Shri Rajiv Gandhi, who in many ways symbolised the spirit of a new generation of Indians.
He was among the first leaders to have given a special focus to the development of sports and games facilities across the length and breadth of the nation.
I am told that this sports centre has facilities for training in various disciplines such as athletics, basketball, kabaddi, kho-kho, volleyball weightlifting and hockey.
We need to replicate such facilities in every district of the country so that young boys and girls have access to facilities to excel in their chosen sports.
Recently, I have had occasion to meet the winners of the Gold and Bronze medals in the Beijing Olympics when they called on me in Delhi.
There should be a societal recognition that sports and games are essential for physical well being, sound mental and emotional health and that they benefit the larger public good.
I look forward to the day when budding sportsmen who have trained in this facility will earn laurels in national and international championships.
That would be the true reward for all the efforts of Minister Aiyar and everyone who has contributed to making this sports facility a reality.
I am happy to be in the historic city of Chennai.
It is a privilege for me to be invited to address the 18th Convocation of this University.
Convocations are special occasions.
They mark the graduation of knowledge seekers from the sanctuary of the academia to the realities and vicissitudes of life outside it.
Convocations also provide opportunity to honour the best and brightest in our academic, social and public life.
I warmly congratulate them and hope that their example would inspire many more students to emulate them.
Friends  We live in vibrant, fast changing times.
At the same time, every calling in life has its own imperatives.
In your case, the contours of dharma were first indicated in the ancient Oath prescribed in the 4th century BC by the Father of Medicine, Hippocrates of Cos.
This has been reiterated in all cultures.
In our country, it is undertaken through the Oath stipulated by the Indian Medical Council (Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002.
Its operative clauses are service to humanity, practice of profession with conscience and dignity, and the primacy of the patient’s health.
The situation is the same for the under five mortality rate and life expectancy at birth.
These are not mere statistics.
These are issues of life and death and go to the very core of the right to life and survival.
These are also matters of moral and political obligation.
The State, according to Article 47 of the Constitution, “shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the improvement of public health as among its primary duties”.
Health and health policies are not usually looked at from the prism of social justice.
The advent of economic liberalization and globalization has led to the emergence of a strong private sector, including in medical education and healthcare.
The Government spends around 1% of GDP on health whereas private expenditure on health is four times the Government expenditure.
Government expenditure on health as a percentage of total Government expenditure is around 3.5%.
The burden of curative treatment is thus primarily borne by citizens who have to mainly rely on private health services.
The choice is thus stark – limited and weak public health service network or expensive and elaborate private health services.
If the poor have the misfortune of facing a life threatening health condition, should they either incur heavy debt for requisite health services or suffer morbidity and mortality?
It need not be this way.
Health need not be transformed into a tradable quantity as a result of a switch to market orientation and advocacy to review the role of public sector.
From the viewpoint of the citizen, accessibility and cost would and should remain the determinants.
Inequities arise when vital public services such as education and health are not recognized as basic and fundamental human rights but are left to the harsh vagaries of the market place.
Such inequities further deepen when the Government and the regulators of the health sector and the medical profession cannot adequately articulate and assign useful and practical roles to the private sector as also public duties for private professionals.
Private medical practice in the country remains a dominant presence in the health sector.
It is troubling that some of its important features do not promote health equity.
Let me mention a few: Friends  The Government’s role as public health service provider is adapting to the changing scenario.
It would appear that such a role is being complemented with an ancillary role of a health facilitator, primarily through Government support for enhancing health insurance coverage.
Some of these schemes that so far have been tried in limited geographical and occupational contexts and with limited coverage have been successful.
Some of the examples include the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana for BPL card holders, the Health Insurance Scheme for weavers and the Rajiv Gandhi Shilpi Swasthya Bima Yojana for artisans.
Some of the State Governments have also initiated their own health insurance schemes, such as the Rajiv Aarogyasri Community Health Insurance Scheme in Andhra Pradesh and the Yeshasvini Cooperative Farmers Health Insurance Scheme in Karnataka.
Health insurance provides a way of risk pooling and cost sharing among various segments of the population.
The expansion of the health insurance sector is currently focused on urban areas and the middle and upper classes.
Necessary secondary and tertiary infrastructure in rural areas is inadequate for effective health coverage to sections that cannot afford health insurance premiums.
Health insurance, in the final analysis, is not a panacea because, on its own, it would be unable to address the enormous inequity in healthcare provision.
Government would continue to be looked upon as the prime provider for secondary and tertiary healthcare by the poorer segments of our population.
Such prime responsibility of governance cannot be outsourced.
Ladies and Gentlemen  It has taken us six decades for the right to primary education to be debated and considered as a Fundamental Right of the young citizens of this nation.
Let us hope that it would not take another six decades for healthcare access to be considered a Fundamental Right of our citizens.
I particularly appeal to the graduating students today to ponder over their role to make this happen.
In doing so, you also need to see how the promotion of a healthy lifestyle could be furthered since prevention is always a better option than cure.
I wish you professional success, happiness and decades of service to humanity.
I thank the Governor for inviting me to this Convocation.
The Constitution endows the Governor of a State with a specific set of responsibilities.
The Governor is also an integral part of the legislature of the State, has the right to address it or send messages to it.
Needless to say, these powers and functions are to be discharged as per the provisions of the Constitution and within the framework of a democratic polity.
Today I wish to draw attention to three aspects of the Governor's work.
These relate to: My observations are based on knowledge that is in the public domain.
The deliberative aspect of its work is to question and debate the policy of the Government.
A conference of the presiding officers of State legislatures in 1995 had recommended that state assemblies should meet for at least 60 days in the case of small states and 100 days in the case of larger states.
The recommendation was reiterated in 1998.
There is sufficient discussion in the media and in civil society about wasted public expenditure due to partial functioning of legislatures.
My second point relates to the role of Governors as Chancellors of universities.
These have an adverse impact on the institutions concerned.
My suggestion is that the pattern and practice followed in the case of the Central Universities that have the President of India as Visitor be adopted in the case of State universities.
This would strengthen the Governor's role in making these appointments and also shield the universities from the vicissitudes of the political debate.
My final point concerns social peace.
These include the weaker sections and the minorities.
Many of these have been identified by the Supreme Court.
This has generated unease and insecurity among the minority segments of the citizen-body.
Any selectivity in tackling it would be detrimental to the constitutional principles of equality and secularism.
The Constitution assigns responsibilities to Governors.
Secreted in the interstices of the constitutional text are its spirit and the purpose for which institution was created.
These need to be explored in the context of the changing requirements of our times.
I thank the Rashthrapati ji for giving me this opportunity to share my views with this august gathering.
Lifting the veil from the conditions of the past is the purpose of the historian.
This, as the historian Ibn Khaldun said, forces stubborn stray wisdom to return to the fold and induce corrective action.
Today's book resurrects a name from the past.
The present generation of Indians know precariously little of these.
There are two aspects of Feroze Gandhi's work that are of abiding relevance.
One is what Shashi Bhushanji calls 'the ideological struggle waged in the fourth Lok Sabha' on the role of the state in the economy.
The other is the role of parliament in scrutinising executive action.
Feroze Gandhi passed away in 1960.
Five decades later the ideological debate has not disappeared; instead, it has developed new dimensions.
The controversy over the SEZs makes this evident.
The problems it has highlighted cannot be brushed away; they need to be addressed.
Equally relevant is Feroze Gandhi's approach to the role of parliament.
In January 2006, the United Nation's Research Institute for Social Development published a study on the role of the Indian Parliament as an Instrument of Accountability.
It concluded that opposition parties are reactive rather than proactive and that the opposition uses Parliament more to impugn the credibility of governments than to exercise accountability for the sake of good governance.
Matters were perhaps better in earlier times.
Feroze Gandhi was a backbencher on the treasury side in the Lok Sabha.
His concern for public good, nevertheless, remained paramount.
Several instances of this are cited in Shashi Bhushanji's book.
Feroze Gandhi raised the matter in the Lok Sabha in stentorian words: 'A mutiny in my mind has compelled me to raise this debate.
The loss of national energy, and of national wealth, is evident.
We do need to put a stop to the loot emanating from corruption, enforce the rule of law with greater diligence, and erase the creeping impression that we are a populist democracy rather than a constitutional one.
A corrective is imperative.
The example set by Feroze Gandhi is worthy of emulation.
Excellencies, distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, I am happy  to be here for the inauguration of the First BRICS Trade Fair.
I extend a warm welcome to the esteemed Trade Ministers from BRICS countries, officials, captains of industry, entrepreneurs and members of the media.
The credit for transforming the vision into reality goes to our Commerce and Industry Minister and her team, in successfully organizing this Trade Fair.
Our five nations--Brazil, Russia, China, South Africa and India-- together account for 43% of the world’s population.
Together, we account for 15% of global trade and 20% of the world’s investment flows.
Our economies represent the most dynamic emerging economies in the word.
Our economies have scale and our decisions have an impact on global markets.
Not only have we made strides as manufacturing and services countries, but we are now developing into significant end markets.
We have the intellectual capital and resolve to shape a more equitable global trading order.
We represent the dynamism, the growth, the future of world trade and business.
As growing economies, we have to translate our growth into inclusive economic development.
We have to reduce unemployment, eradicate poverty and promote social inclusion.
We recognize the importance of balanced global trade for mutual prosperity.
I think it brings forth a more humane face of globalization.
This Trade Fair is an excellent opportunity for encouraging intra-BRICS synergies by linking both the BRICS Business Forum and the BRICS Business Council.
We appreciate the efforts made by all the BRICS Trade Ministers in persuading the strong participation of companies from their respective countries.
We also welcome the participation of companies from the BIMSTEC region.
We acknowledge the role of FICCI in organizing this Trade Fair, with the active support of other apex chambers including CII, ASSOCHAM, other export promotion councils, development authorities and industry associations.
I am sure you will have fruitful deliberations during the Trade Fair.
I wish you all success and good luck in forging mutually beneficial partnerships.
Thank You.
It is heartening that the Convention has since widened its focus to cover the entire gamut of wetland conservation and wise use.
This is in tune with the recognition of wetlands as ecosystems that are vital for conserving our biodiversity and for the well-being of humanity.
The Convention also represents one of the first global treaties devoted to the conservation and sustainable utilisation of natural resources.
By 2025, two out of every three people on Earth may well face water stressed conditions.
The need to conserve wetlands is more pressing than ever.
India is blessed with immense biological and ecological diversity.
These include marine wetlands including coastal lagoons, rocky shores and coral reefs; estuarine wetlands including deltas, tidal marshes and mangrove swamps; wetlands associated with lakes; riverine wetlands; and marshy wetlands.
In addition, there are large human-made wetlands including ponds, irrigated agricultural land, salt pans, reservoirs and canals.
These wetlands are important for our survival and prosperity.
There are currently 25 existing Ramsar sites that are deemed to be wetlands of international importance.
The effort of Dr Asad Rahmani and Mr. Zafar-ul Islam in identifying potential Ramsar sites in India is worthy of appreciation.
Let us hope that their immense contribution would assist the Ministry of Environment in its efforts and eventually lead to some of these sites being recognised as wetlands of international importance.
It is also a matter of satisfaction that there has been synergy in the conservation efforts of the Government and NGOs such as the Bombay Natural History Society, Bird Life International and World Wildlife Fund.
It is an honour to be present here today to confer the Udayan Memorial Journalism Awards for the year 2007.
The late Shri Udayan Sharma represented the best traditions of Indian journalism – professionalism and strong support for the voices of the weak and the oppressed.
He has stood steadfast in defence of secular and human values and against the scourge of communal violence.
Yet, the challenge is neither one of reach nor of quantity.
The harsh truth is that the Indian media is facing a crisis of content.
The phenomenon of convergence between news media, entertainment and telecom has meant that the demarcation between professional journalistic output, public relations, advertising and entertainment is fast blurring.
Questions are being raised whether journalists understand these demarcations and respect them or are willing to sacrifice them for commercial gain and monetary profit.
The public perception today is that the ethical underpinning of professional journalism has weakened.
This crisis of content has manifested itself prominently in the case of the television news media.
The pressure of TRP ratings has meant that astrology, superstition, crime and sleaze have prevailed and the broad trend towards tabloidisation continues.
Print media has attempted to balance commercial concerns with the issues agitating its readership.
Vibrant journalism in a democracy is watchdog journalism.
It monitors the exercise of power in the State and stands for the rights and freedoms of citizens.
It informs and empowers citizens rather than entertains and titillates them.
Vibrant journalism always springs from the bedrock of professional ethics.
I take this opportunity to once again congratulate the winners of the Udayan Memorial Journalism and Photo Journalism Awards for 2007.
I hope that the awards will spur them further in their professional pursuits.
I thank Mrs. Neelima Sharma for inviting me to this awards function today.
Here is a book with a difference.
It is an expression of faith, of individual faith that is also a philosophy of life for anyone who may care to look at it.
I find the format fascinating.
It is an expression of the author’s creed.
It adheres to the medieval form of articulating a creed, of doing it through a word, a phrase, a treatise or a doxology.
Dr. Karan Singh has done it through a set of twelve prepositions.
In logical terms, any expression of belief would necessarily cover three possible categories.
These could be described as essential, absurd, or contingent.
Absurd are those whose existence cannot be conceived by reason.
Some would argue that a fourth category, of faith alone, also exists.
The creed expressed in the book does contain several universal truths.
That life is a mosaic of pleasure and pain and death is a natural corollary of it.
That love is the surest of bonds and must be nourished and cherished.
That provision of ingredients for material existence must precede talk about matters spiritual.
That politics by its nature is turbulent.
That each generation holds the present in trust for posterity.
I share Dr. Karan Singh’s faith in India’s special role in leading humanity towards a new and better equilibrium.
I am sufficiently realistic to believe that this would only be possible after much hard work that awaits us.
The twelve prepositions of belief set the stage for serious and passionate discussions.
That by itself would be the success of the book.
There is always an air of expectation about annual reports.
The India Corruption Study 2007 falls in the latter category.
Ladies and Gentlemen  Corruption in our country has become pervasive and cancerous and is multi-dimensional.
Three broad aspects make this evident: The victims of corruption transcend all classes or groups.
It is therefore important to quantify it as a governance problem and present it in terms that resonate with common citizens.
Thus, computerization, e-governance, citizen charters, RTI Act and social audits have minimal resonance for the poor.
The Report brings to light the negative impact of competitive politics on targeted schemes aimed at the poor.
This, to the extent it is true, amounts to political corruption in its damaging form since it undermines the very institutions of democracy at all levels.
An old maxim states that eternal vigilance is the price of liberty.
In today’s world, it is also insurance for proper governance.
In the final analysis, good governance involves meaningful response to the public’s desire for clear, effective, and transparent governance.
I commend the effort of Transparency International India and Centre for Media Studies and thank Admiral Tahiliani for inviting me today.
It is a privilege for me to be present here with you at the inaugural ceremony of the Ministerial Retreat and Special Session of the Governing Council of the Centre.
The issues and concerns of 1979 continue to reverberate today.
Redistribution of economic and political power, inclusion of rural areas and the rural poor in development, enhancing access to resources and employment in rural areas, focus on non-farm rural activities, education and training activities and agrarian reform continue to be important areas for public policy.
In Asia in general, and in India in particular, poverty has a rural face.
Rural development and poverty alleviation are thus two sides of the same coin.
While macro-economic and globalisation issues have been debated, these remain the penumbra of the shadow of this agrarian crisis.
Given the federal structure, land reform legislation is a state subject and has not been pursued in a uniform pattern.
Civil society movements like ‘Janadesh’ have therefore sought to mobilize opinion for a national land reform policy and a national land reform commission.
The first of these is empowering over 250,000 elected local bodies at the district, intermediate and village levels and thus providing a broad-based and strong political foundation for inclusive and participative growth at the grass-roots level.
This facet of our democracy has completely changed the framework of participative governance in the country and stands as a role model for other developing countries.
While this political and social empowerment in the rural areas is nearing completion, economic empowerment continues to be a work in progress.
Devolution of finances, functions and functionaries to these local bodies is still the subject of much discussion and debate.
The stated commitment of both the Central and State Governments to transform the constitutional mandate given to local bodies into a reality must lead to increased participation of people in planning, decision-making and implementation of various rural development schemes.
The second innovation has been a historic and unique legislation brought in by the Central Government of guaranteeing wage employment in rural areas.
The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act of 2005 guarantees upto 100 days of employment in a financial year to every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work.
It has emerged as a social safety net for vulnerable groups and an opportunity to combine growth with equity.
In keeping with the global debate, the NREGA was premised on a rights-based framework, making employment a legal right.
Over time, the inherent entitlement to employment is expected to be transformed to empowerment through skill development, training, regenerating the natural resource base and bringing about transparency and accountability in governance.
Ladies and Gentlemen  Agrarian reform and rural development issues are inherently political in nature.
While economic and social interventions are necessary, they are not enough to bring about the desired outcomes.
It is therefore the duty of policy makers to ensure that the interaction of politics with policy is constructive and synergistic.
I understand that the Ministerial Retreat would discuss the role of Information Technology in sustainable livelihoods and women empowerment.
Our own varied experience on these issues would be useful across different socio-economic and political contexts.
It gives me great pleasure to be here today at this inauguration ceremony.
Witnessing the birth of an institution is always a moment to be cherished.
History books tell us about Bihar’s past in the field of learning and as home to the ancient centres of excellence of Nalanda and Vikramashila.
It is therefore heartening to find that concerted efforts are being made by the State to revive this tradition.
It is apt that this institute is named after Chandragupt Maurya.
The historian Basham described Chandragupta as the ‘chief architect of the greatest of India’s ancient empires’.
More relevant to our purpose today is Chandragupta’s approaches to public administration and governance.
Kautaliya, who was his principal adviser, has recorded for us his two principles of management: (i) ‘Sukhasya moolam dharmah’ – “The basis of happiness is ethics”; and (ii) ‘Dharmasya moolam arthah’ – “The basis of ethics is resources”.
These two hold good even today for public administration and corporate management.
Friends  It has to be admitted that the state of educational infrastructure in Bihar today does not measure up to its historical standard.
The quality of primary, secondary and tertiary education in the State does not fulfil the requirement of a fast developing society.
Bihar lags behind the national average on various counts – literacy rates, infant and maternal mortality rates, gross enrolment in the 6 to 14 age group, gender related issues etc.
The establishment of a premier management institute in Bihar, on the line of IIM, Ahmadabad, and with a focus on raising the profile of management education and research in the State is therefore timely and the initiative of the Government of Bihar is to be commended.
It will address a gap in management and business education.
Establishing an institute from scratch is a tiring, yet satisfying, task.
It gives the benefit of learning from the mistakes of other institutes and affords an opportunity of not repeating them.
It was a vision founded on minimum acceptable levels of human development, social justice, respect for human rights and greater equity within and between nations.
The Millennium Development Goals were intended to mark a breakthrough in global human development.
While we still have seven years for the target date of 2015 for achieving these goals, the progress undertaken so far has not been encouraging.
In our own country, the Central and State Governments are fully aware that we are a nation of young citizens and that they can be empowered only through widening access to education and promoting excellence therein.
The most daunting task for us is the human development of our people.
As Professor Deepak Nayyar has pointed out, our ‘unfinished journey would not be complete as long as poverty, deprivation and exclusion persist’.
They need to move beyond campus placement and faculty consultancies to undertake applied research into management areas of social relevance to the people of the State.
It is therefore heartening to learn that the Institute has decided to focus on research on core areas of public policy and business management as micro-enterprise management, agri-business management, entrepreneurship, appropriate management and water management.
Ladies and Gentlemen  Bihar has been a land of entrepreneurs.
Entrepreneurship and wealth creation have been ancient themes in this state.
I hope that this Institute would promote this ancient yet thoroughly modern virtue.
Management education and research, when combined with entrepreneurship, have a manifold impact on the national effort of building a knowledge society and an inclusive society.
Indeed, one of the most remarkable developments of recent times is the emergence of knowledge as a resource.
This underscores the centrality of education, and especially tertiary education.
I am confident that the Chandragupt Institute would play an important role in the knowledge economy of the state.
I thank Nitish Kumarji for inviting me to this inauguration and wish the Institute all success in its endeavours to emerge as a centre of excellence for management education and research.
In either case, the speaker would be deprived of what Dr. Samuel Johnson termed ‘frigid tranquillity’.
I Any discussion necessitates clarity about concepts.
Improvement in the quality of weapons, and invention of new ones, is a logical outcome of the human trait to seek excellence, for success in subduing a political and military adversary by inflicting unacceptable damage.
The impulse to invent weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons, was part of this process.
Each new weapon system also propelled assessment of its implications in tactical and strategic terms.
Both processes were accelerated in the second half of the 20th century.
Every invention, apart from its novelty, has to prove its utility.
Mass destruction in the Spanish civil war was vividly depicted by Picasso’s Guernica; less than a decade later, it was typified by London and Dresden.
In the case of the nuclear weapon, the utility was brutally demonstrated at Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
The scale of destruction there propelled consideration of the implications of the new weapon.
An early recognition came in the shape of the Baruch Plan of June 1946.
It was rejected by the Soviet Union for reasons that were evident.
His Action Plan for a World Free of Nuclear Weapons was comprehensive in its scope, passionate in its appeal, and clinical in its reasoning and analysis.
The idea was considered utopian.
In regard to matters nuclear, the world has witnessed changes over the past decade and a half.
This audience is knowledgeable about it.
India herself has emerged as a nuclear weapons state.
On one side it is argued that the imperative of realism leaves no option but to accept the reality.
On the other, those distressed over the fraying of world order and apprehensive of the “normative cost of silence” advocate a more assertive approach.
In the first place and according to the Federation of American Scientists, the global stockpile of nuclear warheads today remains at more than 20,000.
Secondly, nuclear armament ends up being, in its implications, anti-poor and anti-development.
Stephen Schwartz, in his 1998 book ‘Atomic Audit’ on the comprehensive cost of the US nuclear weapons programme, has estimated that the US spent around $6 trillion in total.
The arms race led the former Soviet Union to the point of exhaustion and disintegration.
This level of spending by nuclear weapon states cannot but deny national resources for developmental or other purposes for public welfare.
Thirdly, the development, production, stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons results in immense, irreversible and unforeseen damage to the environment.
In exploring options, we need to remember that the community of nations has put in place agreements to outlaw chemical and biological weapons.
The question of legality poses problems.
It decided that in customary or conventional international law there is neither an authorisation nor a prohibition of the threat or use of nuclear weapons.
It is an irony of Realpolitik that these have so far not been perceived to constitute a threat to international peace and security.
In 1991 Javier Perez de Cuellar had called upon the international community to help develop a “new concept, one which marries law and morality”.
Such an effort of bringing together law and morality would help initiate the process of resolving the dilemma highlighted by the ICJ in its Advisory Opinion.
The process would then take us back to the Russell-Einstein Manifesto’s focus on the human being: “Remember your humanity, and forget the rest.
We have seen that, hitherto, nuclear disarmament has become almost synonymous with nuclear non-proliferation.
A change would be possible only through such an Action Plan.
For much too long, ladies and gentlemen, the question of disarmament has remained in the exclusive domain of states and their experts.
Given the immobility of the current disarmament process, a new methodology may be worth a try.
Thank you.
Sir Syed Ahmad Khan: Vision and Mission Assessing the vision and mission of historical figures is complex business.
Ideas exist in space and time.
Sir Syed focused on the Indian Muslim Condition.
His intentions were doubted, his methods faulted.
The measure of his success is the Aligarh Muslim University, established and nurtured in the teeth of opposition.
The vision of Syed Ahmad Khan was to restore vibrancy to the community of Indian Muslim; the mission was to do it through modern education.
There is no dispute today about either; there is however a serious debate about the measure of his success.
Sir Syed succeeded to a point; it has to be admitted that the movement faltered beyond it.
Two questions arise:   The most important aspect of Syed Ahmad Khan’s mission was self-help.
The primary impulse was individual initiative, and the dedication of a visionary.
He challenged prevailing attitudes and sought to overcome them through persuasion and personal example.
He succeeded in transforming his vision into a movement.
Correct diagnosis is the first step to successful treatment.
We lost a whole century in debates of lesser relevance.
Syed Ahmad Khan suggested a methodology; it is for us to use it imaginatively.
Interestingly enough, this is being done in good measure in southern and western areas of the country; there is no reason why it cannot be emulated by others.
Community priorities, and effort, must be adjusted to derive maximum benefit from the affirmative action by the state.
I do hope that the erudite papers assembled in this volume would also be a contribution to the achievement of this objective.
I commend Prof. Iraqi’s effort.
Thus, the focus principally was on external actors, state and non-state.
To consider the matter fully, some definitional clarity would be helpful.
Governance is defined in a UNDP document as the exercise of political, economic and administrative authority to manage a nation’s affairs.
Good governance is participatory, transparent, inclusive, accountable, and effective.
International norms now include in it the rule of law and observance of human rights.
It ‘has the paradoxical attribute of being visible by its absence rather than its presence’.
II India, wrote two knowledgeable American scholars before the era of economic reforms, ‘is a political and economic paradox: a rich-poor nation with a weak-strong state’.
They set out ‘to unravel this paradox by examining the interactions between polity and economy’.
The interaction between polity and economy reflects on governance in its totality.
Critics have spoken of the crisis of governance and de-institutionalisation; others have dwelt on the resilience and adaptability of the structures.
There is an element of truth in both these assertions.
Our functioning is a mix of dynamism and inertia, of social equilibrium punctured by occasional eruptions, of rule of law flawed by practice of flagrant violations.
We remain committed to democratic governance, transparency and inclusive development but fail to deliver in sufficient measure.
Today, I intend to dwell on the other half of it since it impedes progress.
The challenge is to ascertain the cause of debility, and to rectify it.
Its original meaning has connotations of evil, malignance, sickness, loss of innocence or purity.
This perception of corruption is supported by independent studies undertaken by Transparency International India and other civil society or professional groups.
Two sets of explanations are given to explain, or explain away, the problem.
Both seem plausible, both are false.
If corruption is a universal phenomenon, then it should be present in all societies in proximate measure.
The CP Index shows that it is not so, and that there are countries that steer clear of it with much greater success.
Most of them are also democratic societies.
Gandhiji was therefore right when he observed that corruption ought not to be an inevitable product of democracy.
The disease in India, nevertheless, has deep roots.
Kautilya in Arthashastra noted that public servants could enrich themselves improperly in two ways, either by cheating the government or by exploiting the public.
He listed forty methods of stealing; most of these have a contemporary relevance.
‘Rishwat’ was the title of a long poem written in 1949 by the Urdu poet Josh Malihabadi.
It was reflective of public perception even then.
But corruption is much more than an irritant or growth retardant; it has emerged as a significant national security threat.
The creeping assault of corruption on the national fabric has shaken the legitimacy of the Indian state.
It has eroded state sovereignty and capacity to exercise sovereign functions including ensuring law and order and safeguarding national security for the citizens.
The first, and direct, impact of corruption in its simplest manifestation is on the common man and woman.
Corrupt practices relating to the availability of essential commodities or medicines, their scarcity or absence due to hoarding or diversion to the open market, causes acute hardship; it has an overall inflationary impact.
There is sufficient empirical evidence to prompt a typology of corruption: it is individual or institutional, petty or large scale, bureaucratic, political or economic.
Each type has its own impulses, symptoms and peculiarities.
Each requires a different response within the overarching framework of our democratic system.
Societal perceptions, based on tradition, can and do become an instrument for promoting or tolerating corruption.
The Urdu term ‘kunbah-parvari’ has its equivalents in all our languages.
It means looking after the family or clan based on kinship, ethnic, linguistic or religious ties.
Tradition considers it a desirable social virtue; modernity translates it as nepotism and frowns upon it.
The role of intermediaries possessing skills in illegality and networking abilities is of great relevance in this regard.
III In a democracy, political power resides with the people.
The quality and integrity of the political representative, therefore, becomes a matter of critical relevance for the proper functioning of a democracy.
There are, he wrote, two ways of making a vocation of politics: either to live for politics, or live off it.
The CBI, in its institutional memory, would know more about the latter category than the scholars and commentators who have written on the subject!
Corruption, writes Ramachandra Guha in his tome on the history of contemporary India, is the ‘inconvenient fact’ of Indian democracy.
It obstructs the egalitarian and participatory public agenda that the people of India have given themselves.
He concludes that: These judgements can be, and have been, quantified nationally and by international agencies.
They should leave us in no doubt that we are confronted by a problem of monstrous dimensions.
It is also squarely in the public domain.
The question is of the will, the instrumentality of implementation and of its efficacy.
The three go together and interact on each other.
None can be considered in isolation.
Other perceptions may be more sanguine.
Most agree on the imperative need for correctives.
Would the system, and particularly the state governments, respond in adequate measure?
IV Ladies and gentlemen We have a situation in which the politics of corruption and the corruption of politics fuel each other.
Both impact adversely on governance and therefore on development.
The conclusion is unavoidable that corruption hampers governance and development and constrains the progress of the Indian society.
Since it impacts on all aspects of state activity, it becomes the most important threat to the state, more so because it is less visible than the external enemy.
The situation is perilous but retrievable.
A successful campaign against corruption in public life needs to have moral, legal, political, administrative and economic dimensions.
The following would be relevant: First, individual resolve, group pressure and public commitment can help roll back the threat in good measure.
Second, the moral realm is relevant because it motivates and has an impact on the character of individual citizens.
Morality is a social necessity since pervasive immorality cannot but be destructive to social order.
It derives its sustenance from tradition and religious or ethical principles.
The impediment at the moment is that corruption is accepted in the social psyche and behaviour as an unavoidable fact of life.
Even the tinge of disapproval is missing.
We need to bring back the sense of right and wrong, and place corruption squarely in the latter category.
Third, legal structures are necessary to confront breaches of law.
A maze of regulations is already in existence.
Observers consider them cumbersome and dilatory.
Experience highlights their inadequacy.
It has been noted that the conviction rate in our courts is only 6 percent.
The corrective lies in strict enforcement of the principle of accountability at all levels and in simplifying procedures.
Endless enquiries allow the wicked to consolidate their gains; a specified time span for investigation and prosecution of corruption cases is essential.
The Supreme Court in the Vineet Narain case had advocated the need for an impartial prosecution agency on the lines of the Director of Prosecution in the United Kingdom.
To restore and enhance public confidence in the investigation agency, its work in corruption cases should be immunized from political considerations.
Fourth, at the political level, it is not sufficient to endorse ritualistically the advice given by sages on the need for righteousness.
The bar of integrity has to be raised higher and defaults dealt with greater rigour.
The matter eventually relates to the legitimacy of the political system.
This, in a democratic state, must be judged by its citizens and renewed on a continuous basis.
Periodic elections are the normal way of doing it.
If however the system begins to feast on itself, then external correctives become unavoidable.
Fifth, we must look at countering corruption beyond the framework of law enforcement, and promote the participation of individuals and groups outside the public sector.
Civil society, NGOs and community based organisations must be harnessed in raising the awareness about this ‘enemy within’ and in fighting it.
The Right to Information Act, public interest litigation and some steps taken by the Central Vigilance Commission have helped the process considerably.
Some correctives suggested by the Fourth Report of the Administrative Reform Commission, headed by Shri Verappa Moily, appear promising.
In today’s world, corruption has emerged as a global phenomenon and it is important that all countries support international cooperation in the fight against corruption.
The work undertaken by the UNDP on human development and governance and the Anti-Corruption Toolkit developed by the UN Office on Drugs and Crimes proved useful in applying correctives.
India has signed the United Nations Convention against Corruption in December 2005.
We are yet to ratify this Convention and must do so at the earliest.
Seventh, as a society and polity, we need to encourage more inclusive and universal affiliations based on commitment to pluralism and secularism, rule of law and constitutionalism.
Broadening the base of civic and public participation would build a stake for discouraging nepotism and other corrupt practices.
To do so, and in addition to their professional skills, they have to adhere to the Gandhian model of a moral character and hold aloft the banner of a principled approach.
Failure to do so in adequate measure would corrode public confidence, breed cynicism and would be altogether harmful to the Republic and its democratic principles.
This is the challenge that a premier institution like the CBI has to address.
I am confident that it has the will, the resources and the leadership to do it.
I wish the Bureau all success in its work and thank the Director for inviting me today.
It is pleasure to be here to join you for the centenary celebrations of the Central Water and Power Research Station (CWPR).
Water is an essential ingredient for all life on the planet.
It is a major determinant of our physical and biological environment.
It is also an important natural resource, providing the basis for domestic, agricultural, industrial and other economic activities.
Of the remaining one percent, a fifth is in remote, inaccessible areas and much seasonal rainfall in monsoonal deluges and floods cannot easily be used.
Due to the small percentage of water remaining, optimizing the fresh water we have left from natural resources has become a major challenge.
Our country, today, is facing an acute water crisis.
The major causes for this can be summarized as2;  One of the biggest concerns for our water-based resources in the future is the sustainability of the current and even future water resource allocation.
Water stress has a bearing on various sectors of Indian economy including the agricultural, industrial, domestic and household, power, environment, fisheries and transportation sectors.
The interplay of various factors that govern access and utilization of water resources need to be considered and it becomes incumbent that we look for holistic and people-centered approaches for water management.
It had put great emphasis on aquifer mapping, watershed development, involvement of civil society and NGOs, and efficiency in developing irrigation capacity.
Because water is a state subject under our constitution, state governments are expected to play a large role in these efforts.
For 100 years the Central Water and Power Research Station (CWPRS) has been providing the nation with valuable insights in the management of our water resources.
The Centre has become the principal agency to cater to the Research and Development needs of projects in the fields of water and energy resources development and water-borne transport.
I am very happy to note that, today, this Centre is widely recognized as one of the foremost organizations in the world in the field of hydraulics and allied research.
As the Regional Laboratory of United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) since 1971, CWPRS has also offered its services to a number of projects in the neighbourhood as well as in West Asia and Africa.
I am sure that with the support of the Government of India, CWPRS will continue making waves at the cutting edge of hydraulic research by continuously improving its facilities and expertise.
In the coming years, the impact of climate change on hydrological cycle and the water availability in our country is likely to become a central question before national planning agencies.
Relatively very large temporal and spatial variation in rainfall, and consequently in the river flow and ground water aquifers is a feature of the water resources in India.
This makes the water availability in India acutely susceptible to vagaries of climate change.
The field of water resources management will have to continue to adapt to the current and future issues facing the allocation of water.
As a result, new management strategies will have to be implemented in order to avoid setbacks in the allocation of water resources.
I once again congratulate all the scientists, administrators and staff of the Central Water and Power Research Station of achieving this historical landmark and wish you all the very best in your future endavours.
Jai Hind.
Even greater is the honour bestowed on me by the decision of the University.
Mohammad bin Mohammad bin Tarkhan Abu Nasr al-Farabi was a Central Asian polymath and one of the greatest scientists and philosophers of the Islamic world in his time.
He was also a cosmologist, logician, musician, psychologist and sociologist.
It is truly befitting that this University with a distinguished history of over seventy years and contribution to the development of native science, technics, culture, and higher education should bear Al Farabi’s name.
Ladies and Gentlemen We live in interesting times.
When I see the young students of this University I see the energy and dynamism of youth, their restlessness and impatience for better lives and happiness and their hope and optimism for the future.
We too are a young nation.
Over 550 million Indians, out of a total of a billion, are below the age of 25 years.
The young are also the seed bearers of tomorrow’s leaders.
Both our countries have been fortunate in having wise leaders at critical points of our histories.
Leadership, like all resources, is scarce; its domain and platforms are contested.
A leader, by definition, stands apart; but he does not stand alone.
He must ensure continuous nourishment from the group he leads; in turn, he enriches the group by his leadership.
The challenge for an open society is to ensure this.
In India, we have set for ourselves a national objective of building a knowledge society, an inclusive society, and a humane society.
The most daunting task for our new leaders is the human development of our people.
Their mandate is to explore and exploit all the possibilities for socio-economic advancement and personal fulfillment of our citizens.
They also have to lead them to it.
I am tempted to quote Martin Luther King Jr.
He said: ‘Human progress is neither automatic nor inevitable.
We are faced now with the fact that tomorrow is today.
We are confronted with the fierce urgency of now.
Similar is the case with the old paradigms of security.
Today we do face problems in physical connectivity between our countries.
Ladies and gentlemen Our approach to the world is naturally a function of our values, our history and geography, and of how we define our interests.
India’s main focus since independence has been to improve our people’s lives through inclusive economic development within a pluralist, secular, equitable and democratic framework.
In making this effort, India has also decisively demonstrated that democracy and development are compatible and necessary for ensuring sustainability.
The primary task of our foreign policy has been to enable the transformation of India’s society and economy, restoring traditional patterns of dealing with the world, and building strategic autonomy of choice.
For more than two decades, India has recorded average annual GDP growth of around 6%.
In the last four years, this has risen to around 9%.
Historically unprecedented transformations and improvements in the people’s living standards have taken place in India in the last few decades.
Yet, much remains to be done.
We need considerable effort, correct public policy choices and a supportive and peaceful international environment.
Our foreign policy is also based on principles and a broad national consensus.
The vision of our leaders like Mahatma Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru, Indira Gandhi and Rajiv Gandhi has led to the emergence of a secular polity.
We share the values of fundamental human rights and freedoms with other democracies.
Our values and civilisational heritage make us a barrier against fundamentalism and terrorism and a factor of peace and stability.
We also seek maintenance of friendly relations with all countries, resolution of conflicts through peaceful means and equity in the conduct of international relations.
We firmly believe that global threats demand global responses and equitable sharing of responsibilities.
India has actively pursued the strengthening of multilateral institutions, in particular the United Nations.
We are committed to the comprehensive reform of the United Nations, including its Security Council.
Friends Relations between India and Kazakhstan have always been warm, friendly and close.
Our views coincide or converge on all major regional and international questions.
I am confident that stronger and deeper relations between Kazakhstan and India will further contribute to increased prosperity and security not only for the peoples of our countries, but also for the region and the world.
I once again thank the University for conferring this honour on me and inviting me today.
I wish the students a bright and happy future.
Thank you.
It is thus linked to governance and is therefore as old as governance.
There were others also who dwelt on the subject, long before Machiavelli appeared on the scene.
In the 19th century the Viennese professor Lorenz von Stein considered public administration to be a melting pot of several disciplines and was a forum for interaction between theory and practice.
This distinction between what the state must do and may do is perhaps reflective of affluence that is got given to most developing countries.
In our own times it is evident that there is a relationship between governance and development.
There is enough empirical evidence now that governance plays a central role in economic development and growth because of its crucial role in resource accumulation and allocation.
Governance is understood here to mean a focus on outcomes and the extent to which governments institute and implement policies in the interests of all citizens.
It is only in the last decade or so that international developmental theory has recognised that development is not only about projects, programmes and policies, but also about politics.
The people must have the right political and economic opportunities to create institutions that are responsible for their needs and priorities.
Development, in this sense, is not what a government does to its people but what the people do by themselves and for themselves.
In India, this basic paradigm of public administration was enshrined in the Preamble to our Constitution.
The public administration and choice of public policy in the country had been geared towards evolving delivery structures and mechanisms to achieve these outcomes.
In the initial period after independence this effort focused on three issues: It was in the sixties and seventies that the traditional role of public administration of ensuring law and order and of revenue collection began to be questioned and demands made for expansion of its mandate.
It was a time when growth rates in India had fallen and state intervention in economic and political administration was less than effective.
It was also a period when the efficacy of political and economic checks and balances was gradually eroded.
A percentage of the seats in local bodies are reserved for marginalized and vulnerable communities.
This innovative and imaginative step became, in the words of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh ‘the medium to transform rural India into 700 million opportunities’.
It enhanced participatory governance and broad-based planning and implementation of programmes of economic development and social justice.
It is the greatest experiment in democracy ever undertaken anywhere in the world or at any time in history.
For the first time in our history, the Indian economy has grown at close to 9.0 per cent per annum for four years in a row.
The historically high investment rate of over 35% of GDP, and savings rate of over 34% of GDP symbolize a new dynamism in our economy.
In the recent past, public administration and public policy have been focused on making the growth process socially inclusive and regionally balanced.
Other important elements include civil society, polity, the economic and business sectors and the judiciary.
Some of these areas are more contested and competitive than others.
Ensuring the prosperity and well being of citizens demands that we continue to make progress on all aspects of governance.
I thank the Rector and Members of the Academy for inviting me today.
Thank you.
I am touched by the warmth of the welcome and the hospitality extended to me, my wife and my delegation.
We, in India, admire Kazakhstan for its achievements of the last fifteen years.
The vision of His Excellency President Nazarbayev in steering the nation towards newer horizons and greater heights is truly remarkable.
His recent address to the nation crystallizes his vision towards an ambitious path of development.
It is a mark of your success that Kazakhstan today plays an increasingly important role in multilateral fora.
Excellency I come from a land in the throes of change.
At the beginning of the last decade, India embarked on its reform process.
For the first time in our history, the Indian economy has grown at close to 9 per cent per annum for four years in a row.
The historically high investment rate, of over 35% of GDP, and savings rate, of over 34% of GDP, point to a new economic dynamism.
India is a young nation, with a median age of 24 years.
India has the third largest technical man power in the world.
Our growing capabilities in emerging areas of science and technology are being globally recognized and give us the wherewithal to assist you in your efforts.
India has historical and cultural linkages with your region spanning millennia.
These links constitute a strong foundation for the edifice of bilateral relations in contemporary times.
It is a matter of satisfaction that these have progressed steadily.
Relations between Kazakhstan and India have traditionally been warm, friendly and multi - faceted.
The ties date back to ancient times.
Both our societies are multi- ethnic, multi-religious, multi-lingual and multi-cultural.
We share similarity of orientation and views on important regional and international issues.
While Kazakhstan and India have good relations at political, social and cultural levels, our ties in economic and commercial spheres are not commensurate with the vast potential that exists.
With both our economies registering impressive growths in recent years, there are new and wide ranging opportunities for us to expand areas of economic cooperation.
We need to encourage more people to people contact in both the countries.
I would also like to congratulate you Mr. Chairman, for your valuable contribution in furthering the bilateral relations between our countries in your present and previous capacities.
The challenges of today defy borders.
Collective effort is needed to fight the menace of terrorism, global pandemics and other destabilizing factors.
It is imperative that we work together with determination on the path of development.
I am confident that through our joint efforts, we will be able to further consolidate our cooperation in the coming years to our mutual benefit.
I bring warm greetings of the people of India, of the Members of our Parliament and of the Government.
History in India and Kazakhstan goes back to ancient times and has common strains and points of convergence.
Our regions were agricultural societies in the old world and evolved into urban civilizations.
We had cultural relations and trade contacts.
So does the Silk Route which played a seminal role in transporting not only commodities for trade, but more importantly knowledge and ideas.
Illustrative examples of these are the flow of Buddhism from India to Central Asian lands and eventually to China, and the flow of the ideas of Sufism from Central Asia to India.
Our recent past too has commonalities.
We are multi ethnic, multi religious societies with secular state structures.
India is a vibrant democracy and Kazakhstan has opted for a democratic mode of governance.
We are growing economies committed to inclusive development and better living standards for all sections of our society.
We have understood the importance of managing diversity and are harnessing it for the wellbeing of our people.
India’s diversity is staggering.
An Indian currency note reflects this diversity – you can find 17 languages on it.
Followers of all the major religions of the world are found amongst the citizens of India.
Excellency, Honourable Senators, Ladies and Gentlemen Constitutions are reflective both of the genius of a people and of the requirements of a society, the challenges faced by it, its responses, hopes and aspirations.
Each constitution, therefore, is unique.
A country may be democratic or non-democratic; its structure may be unitary or federal; its legislature may be unicameral or bicameral; its form of governance may be presidential or parliamentary.
What matters, in the final analysis, is the effectiveness of the response to the requirements of the situation.
In this context and since no one has a monopoly of truth or wisdom, exchanges of information and of experience have been found to be beneficial.
This is done on common fora like the Inter Parliamentary Union or through bilateral exchanges.
These words are reflective of wisdom and maturity of approach.
Friends Some of you may be aware that India gained its independence in 1947 and has, in the past six decades, developed and deepened democratic institutions based on universal adult franchise at three levels in our polity.
We have a bicameral federal parliament, state assemblies in each of our 30 states, and 240,000 village level assemblies.
Today, India is not only the world’s largest democracy but is also one of the most innovative in accommodating diverse, often conflicting, demands.
The Rajya Sabha or the Council of States is one of the two chambers of the Parliament of India.
It has a membership of 245 (including 12 who are nominated).
Its 233 elected members are chosen by the members of the state assemblies according to the system of proportional representation by means of single transferable vote.
The term of a member is 6 years and one-third of the members retire every second year.
The two chambers of our Parliament have been conferred equal powers except on some issues.
The Lok Sabha or the House of the People has sole jurisdiction on money matters, voting on demand for grants and on ‘making or unmaking governments.
The makers of our Constitution envisaged the role of the Rajya Sabha along three axes: Friends The essence of democracy is participatory governance.
Experience the world over has shown that this ensures responsiveness and transparency.
The mechanism for it lies in the functioning of legislatures and the institutional structures created for the purpose.
In the Parliament of India this is achieved through Questions, Motions of different categories on matters of public importance, Resolutions and regular discussions.
Through each of these, the government is obliged to respond to general or specific queries.
In recent years, the requirement of transparency is also attained through the Right of Information Act passed by the Parliament in 2005.
The domain of parliament is the totality of state policy.
In today’s globalised and inter-dependent world, this covers every aspect of external relations.
Interactions between Parliaments and parliamentarians offer opportunities to appreciate the mutual concerns and perceptions on crucial issues and challenges that confront people in different countries of the world.
Parliaments thus have an important role to play in strengthening bilateral relations between our countries.
It is heartening to learn that there is a Special India Friendship group in the Mazhilis of the Kazakhstan Parliament.
I am happy to see that a group of parliamentarians from Kazakhstan visited India last year.
Such exchanges must further increase and lead to deepening of the friendship and understanding between our countries and peoples.
Ladies and Gentlemen In the world of today and tomorrow, relations between countries would necessarily focus on mutually beneficial cooperation.
This would be true of countries big and small, rich or poor, developed or developing.
Such cooperation would require matching of requirements and capabilities.
This general proposition holds good for cooperation between Kazakhstan and India.
One significant area of cooperation could transform our relationship.
President Nazarbayev in his address to the nation in February this year talked about the need to expand high quality education services.
It is here that India can make a useful contribution to Kazakhstan.
The quality of our professionals be they engineers, doctors or information technology experts, is very high and they have contributed in significant measure to the growth of our services sector during the last decade.
Both governments could therefore explore the potential for cooperation in the higher education sector by sending Indian professionals to Kazakhstan and training Kazakh students and professionals in various disciplines in India.
The private sector and civil society in both countries should also be actively involved in such cooperation.
However with the economies of both India and Kazakhstan also registering impressive growth in recent years, there are wide ranging opportunities for both countries to expand the areas of economic cooperation.
Greater economic engagement between India and the countries of the region is not only mutually beneficial for the countries but also for the whole region and the world.
I have extended an invitation to Chairman Tokayev during our discussions.
I am confident that cooperation between both our countries would continue to make good progress for the betterment of people of both our countries.
Thank You.
I am delighted and grateful for the excellent hospitality extended to me and my delegation.
Kazakhstan has achieved huge progress in political, economic and social spheres with in a short span of time as a new nation and has emerged as a country characterized by political stability and a strong economy.
Relations between our countries have always been cordial, friendly and warm.
Our countries enjoy a dynamic and vibrant bilateral political, economic and cultural relationship.
The good relations at political level need also to be reflected in our economic relations.
There is enormous potential and many profitable opportunities to expand our bilateral trade and improve our commercial ties.
I am confident that the relations between our countries would continue to grow and prosper in the coming years.
Thank you.
I am happy to be here in Kazakhstan and in the vibrant city of Astana.
My first impressions of Astana have been breathtaking; the city has attained high levels of development in a relatively short period of time.
We admire Kazakhstan for its significant achievements in political and economic spheres since independence in 1991.
We in India consider the Central Asian region as our extended neighbourhood.
This was underlined in our very productive interaction with Chairman of Senate His Excellency Mr. Kassym J. Tokayev and his delegation.
Our discussions were constructive and fruitful and covered a wide range of bilateral, regional and international issues.
The convergence of views on issues of mutual interest is heartening.
Relations between India and Kazakhstan have traditionally been warm, friendly and multi-faceted.
These have progressed steadily since the independence of Kazakhstan in 1991 and it is a matter of immense satisfaction.
We are well poised for a more dynamic and mutually beneficial relationship in the near future.
It has evolved into an organisation that is responsive to the challenges and issues of the times.
I also expressed our appreciation of President Nazarbayev’s initiative in organizing the Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions in 2009.
We congratulate Kazakhstan for election to the Chair of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe in 2010.
This is a reflection of Kazakhstan’s growing status in international affairs.
The volume of trade between our countries in 2007 was close to US $ 200 million.
We held discussions on means of increasing bilateral trade and expanding the areas of economic cooperation, particularly in the hydrocarbon sector.
There are immense possibilities of expanding our cooperation in economic, commercial, cultural, scientific and political spheres.
I have extended an invitation to Chairman Tokayev to visit India at a mutually convenient time.
We also eagerly look forward to the visit of His Excellency President Nazarbayev to India in the near future.
I deem it an honour and privilege to address the Honourable Members of the Senate, which is my next engagement.
I will be visiting the Academy of Public Administration in Astana and Al Farabi Kazakh National University in Almaty.
I will be meeting His Excellency President Nazarbayev and Prime Minister Massimov during my visit.
I have no doubt that our discussions would be productive and useful and further contribute to the strengthening of the friendly relations between our countries and peoples.
Thank you.
I bring to you the greetings and good wishes of Her Excellency the President of India and of the government and people of India.
Turkmenistan is the first country of my visit abroad as Vice President.
This is no coincidence; it reflects the importance India attaches to the Central Asian region in general and Turkmenistan in particular.
We in India have been watching with interest and appreciation the reform and development process initiated by Your Excellency.
My interaction with Your Excellency earlier today has reaffirmed our views on your dynamism and zeal in modernising your country.
The constructive and proactive engagement of the Government of Turkmenistan in the international arena is a welcome development.
We look forward to India engaging more closely with Turkmenistan in various areas of cooperation for mutual benefit.
The second meeting of the Inter Governmental Commission held in New Delhi in January 2008 has made wide ranging recommendations.
I had an opportunity then to discuss these issues in New Delhi with Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Mr. Rashid Meredov.
I am happy that we have made a good beginning and are serious about our bilateral engagement.
Excellency, India and Turkmenistan are great ancient civilizations with ties dating back to several millennia.
These ties were enriched and strengthened by continued interaction in centuries gone by.
India’s capital city, Delhi, is dotted with monuments that prove this legacy.
Excellency, India considers Turkmenistan an extended neighbour, a natural ally and a key partner in Central Asia.
There are opportunities in both countries, complementarities in resources and skills and willingness to develop a strategic friendship.
We need persistence in the pursuit of mutually beneficial projects, allowing more exchanges of people, ideas and appropriate technologies and devising common strategies on issues of mutual interest.
We appreciate the bold initiatives taken in Turkmenistan towards economic reforms and to attract foreign investment.
The ongoing economic reforms will pave the way for a rapid transformation and India would like to be a partner in progress with Turkmenistan.
India on its part is a vibrant and growing economy with significant capabilities in key service sectors and in specific areas of manufacturing industry and R&D.
We must interact on the basis of our competitive advantage and locational advantage.
Major multi-national companies of the world are based in India and many Indian companies have global operations.
Our technically qualified workforce is contributing to their success worldwide.
Our bilateral trade has registered an impressive increase.
Indian pharmaceutical companies are doing well in Turkmenistan and the Turkmen authorities have been supportive towards the efforts and initiatives of Indian businessmen.
We are well linked through air routes.
Setting up of an IT Centre in Ashgabat is in an advanced stage; the feasibility study has been completed.
The Cultural Exchange Programme, Science & Technology Agreement, Agreement on Trade and Economic Cooperation and Comprehensive Education Agreement are under active consideration.
Despite the excellent progress, the potential of bilateral cooperation and economic engagement is far from realised.
You would Excellency, I am sure, will agree with me that the level of economic and commercial engagement between India and Turkmenistan does not adequately reflect the potential and complementarities of the two economies.
India would be happy to share its experience of economic and education reforms with our friends in Turkmenistan.
I understand that Turkmenistan, along with other countries of the region, is developing a network of rail and motor transport network.
Improving connectivity is critical for enhancing bilateral trade between India and countries of Central Asia, and especially with Turkmenistan.
In view of our experience and capabilities, we stand ready to offer assistance in capacity building in all sectors including English language, computers and Information Technology, medicine and pharmaceuticals, business management, all streams of engineering, law, fashion and textiles, automobile, agriculture and sericulture.
India stands ready to provide training under the ITEC (India Technical and Economic Cooperation) programme including tailor-made courses in all key sectors.
India could be the ideal destination for Turkmen students and teachers for higher education and advanced training.
India could help Turkmenistan in achieving its objective of universal access to telecommunication in the most cost effective manner.
Turkmenistan is a focus country for India and a priority destination.
Indian tractors, water pumps and agro-chemicals are suitable to Turkmen requirements and are cost effective.
We need to explore the possibilities for joint ventures in areas such as leather processing, cotton yarn making, wool processing and pharmaceutical projects.
Indian infrastructure and construction companies should also look at participating in Turkmen projects focussed on modernising urban facilities and infrastructure areas like rail and road networks.
Cooperation in value added segment of cotton and textile sector also holds great promise.
I understand that Turkmenistan is developing a national tourist zone at Avaza, at the Caspian coastal city of Turkmenbashy.
Indian companies from construction and hospitality sectors could participate in this project.
Tourism has the potential to emerge as another area of cooperation.
India is an attractive destination as a place for cultural and medical tourism.
India, with its vast requirement of energy and dependence on imports to meet it, is Turkmenistan’s natural partner.
I thank you, Excellency, for the formal support we have received from Turkmenistan about our membership in the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India pipeline project.
Indian companies like ONGC, OVL, GAIL and IOC have vast expertise, experience and required capital, and are willing to partner with Turkmenistan by constructively participating in Turkmen energy sector, in upstream and down stream activities.
Indian companies have also developed expertise in shallow water, off shore and onshore activities.
I am happy that a framework MOU on cooperation in the oil and gas sector is being signed between the Ministries of Oil and Gas of the two Governments and this should pave the way for constructive engagement of Indian companies in this important sector in Turkmenistan.
I strongly believe that we have to enhance interaction at governmental, business and people-to-people levels.
We have to become true partners in each other’s economic, cultural and social development.
I am confident that under your guidance we can broaden and deepen our relationship; in this context, we should also encourage exchanges between our Parliaments.
We will cherish the memories and this experience.
It is a privilege to be invited to deliver the Foundation Day Lecture at the Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Contemporary Studies.
Rajiv Gandhi was a visionary who focused on the future of this great land of ours.
He was also a realist who appreciated that a vision of the future must of necessity be anchored in the present and build upon it.
I A professor of theoretical physics said some time back that the future ‘will resemble a fairy tale’.
This would undoubtedly be true of scientific advancement.
I would like to proceed on this basis to develop a vision of the future, and India’s place in it.
For this reason, a longer time span is unavoidable.
Its population of 1.5 billion would exceed that of China by about 50 million.
Our GDP would be slightly over half of that of China and around three quarters of that of the US.
Somewhat similar projections have come from the World Bank and some other assessment agencies.
Demography would have a wider impact.
62 percent of the world’s people would be in Africa, South Asia and East Asia.
Asia’s share alone of the world’s GNP would go up from the current one-third to about half.
The challenges would be many.
The shape of India in the second half of the 21st century would depend in great measure on our ability to respond to these challenges.
As Professor Srinivas put it, caste is both a structural principle of society and a dynamic force in interest articulation, collective mobilization and social movement.
It thus impacts on all aspects of social life.
To what extent would it drain national energy in the later decades of the century?
The religious plurality of India is a fact of life.
Most accept it; some rejoice in it, some others bemoan it.
Virtually every fifth Indian belongs to a religious minority and cherishes its identity.
The constitutional framework is accommodative and has stood the test of pressures.
The challenge lies in translating legal equality into the elimination of deprivation and discrimination that are finally being recognised.
Would the corrective process of empowerment, as an imperative of harmonious and inclusive development, be undertaken in years rather than decades?
A major obstacle to a unified national impulse is the ‘balkanization of the mind’ that is increasingly evident despite political unity, and the unity of the market that has been achieved.
We cannot claim the benefits of globalization and the attendant mobility in services on the world stage sector and at the same time deny it within the country itself.
What would be its implications?
They need to be comprehended.
The corrective to each has to be a deliberate effort, rooted in the consciousness of the civil society itself, so that it can overcome social and political lethargy and develop alternatives.
The vanguard in the effort has to be the youth; their optimism, hopefully, would be infectious.
Economic success and prosperity would also rest on three factors, namely the human development of our people, the success of our large market to attract investment and technology, and good governance.
Education is the most critical determinant of empowerment of people.
It gives them skills and life chances and turns them into productive members of societies.
Our record in this regard has so far not been bright.
The Eleventh Plan promises greater movement towards fulfilling the constitutional obligation of providing free compulsory education of good quality to all children upto the age of 14 years.
This would determine the extent to which we can transform our human potential to development, growth and personal well being.
Much has been said in recent months about agriculture.
It supports more than half a billion people, provides employment to 52 % of the workforce and remains the backbone of the economy; it is also in a state of stagnation.
It is widely acknowledged that both for reduction of poverty and for sustainable growth the power of agriculture must be unleashed.
Thus new techniques need to be developed for arid and semi-arid land farming where rural distress is most acute.
Reforming agriculture is also about enhancing the quality of public services in rural India.
Development of land and water resources should be seen as the obligation of the state rather than a burdened peasantry.
Agricultural marketing and extension systems also need immediate reform.
Agriculture must also be ready to deal with the dangers of climate change and global warming.
Eventually this will have its own impact on rural poverty.
Climate shocks such as droughts and floods drastically reduce long-term opportunities for human development.
High poverty and low levels of human development limit our capacity to manage climate risks, especially for the vast majority of our population that is poor.
Agriculture cannot be left as residual activity for the elderly.
The interest of the youth in agriculture requires attention.
The quality of sanitation, health, education and other public services vary widely across multiple dimensions – rural/urban, various states and districts, gender etc.
Such migrations are always accompanied by community-focused friction and attendant social and political problems.
Managing and smoothening migration flows would be an important component of ensuring social stability and economic growth in the future.
Two things, however, would change.
The first would be an upward movement in our capacity to deal with them.
India of the future, after the application of the correctives mentioned above, would be more prosperous, more inclusive, more accommodative and more confident of its ability to resolve complex social issues.
Its charter of rights and duties would be more pervasive; its commitment to the achievement of justice more purposeful.
The second factor would be a change in the nature of the external world and the resultant changes in the terms of our interaction with it.
New norms like human rights and globalization, new threats like pandemics and environmental changes, and new technologies for global communications cast doubt on claims of sovereignty.
A new form of state is emerging.
A garden is smaller, more inwardly turned – it aims for the sublime, not the efficient or the just’.
Every market state, he adds, will make historic choices among these or other possible models.
As a result, individual states will change – they are already changing – to reacquire legitimacy by creating a new basis on which they may claim it.
India of the future, in the best case scenario, cannot be and will not be isolationist.
It would interact with the external world as an important member of the comity of nations.
Its economic weight would be felt without overt demonstration.
Changes in the nature of its economic capabilities would lead to a change in the nature of its economic engagement with the external world.
India’s external impact would be most profound in its demonstration of the working of the triad - its plural society, its democratic polity and its secular state structure.
If tensions in our society do not subside, our output would suffer and impact adversely on our external impulse.
Thank you.
I am happy to be with you on this important occasion of World Water Day, celebrated globally since 1993.
It is also appropriate that this year we focus on issues related to Sanitation with 2008 being declared the International Sanitation Year.
Scriptures describe the act of creation.
They say that in the beginning the earth was a formless void, covered with water.
Even today 70% of the surface of our earth is water.
Water is life giving and life sustaining.
It is a vital resource that is finite and vulnerable.
Water conservation and replenishment is increasingly assuming a global dimension.
Ladies and Gentlemen The last three decades have witnessed an impressive effort to provide access to safe drinking water to Indian households.
It is heartening that while only 38% of households had access to drinking water in 1981, that figure has gone up to 78% by 2001.
This is a result of our National Water Policy according the highest priority to drinking water in the planning and operation of the water resources system as also the success of the ‘Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme’.
Provision of sanitation facilities continues to remain a major challenge.
This is far lower than the global coverage of 58%, the developing countries’ coverage of 49% and even that of sub-Saharan Africa of 36%.
It is vital that our people have access to basic facilities including clean drinking water and improved sanitation for inclusive and sustainable growth.
I am confident that the government would continue to emphasize provision of safe drinking water and access to improved sanitation keeping in view the developmental, environmental and public health aspects.
We should also forge partnerships with NGOs and civil society as part of our efforts, at both the micro and global levels.
I thank Prof. Soz for inviting me today and wish all success to the efforts of the Ministry of Water Resources.
This is a rare honour.
I feel humbled by your decision to confer on me the 2015 Indira Gandhi Memorial Lectureship of The Asiatic Society.
This institution is of ancient vintage.
A complex Indian reality has emerged.
Thus the de jure “WE, the sovereign people” in the first line of the Preamble is in reality a fragmented ‘we’, divided by yawning gaps that remain to be bridged.
This exercise was conducted in the Constituent Assembly and is reflected in its totality in the Preamble to the Constitution.
The Constitution was adopted by the Constituent Assembly on November 26, 1949 and formally came into force on January 26, 1950.
These fissures raise questions.
The Supreme Court in 1994 had characterised it as possessing ‘the merit of preponderance of decisiveness over representativeness.’14 Despite this, the FPTP continues to be the subject of considerable discussion.
This, in the context of the overall national voting percentage of 66.4% makes evident the actual representativeness of the elected representative.
One study shows that it was 31% in 2014.16  This is accentuated by the unequal presence of weaker sections, especially women and minorities, in the power structure as reflected in elected bodies.
In the 2014 general election, women constituted 11 per cent of the total elected Lok Sabha members and while some religious minorities are well represented, the representation of others is noticeable deficient.
A related question pertains to the financing of elections.
It is corroding the system.
Today, we are confronted by a paradox.
While the registered voter participation in elections has steadily increased, the actual functioning of the legislatures has steadily decreased.
(The Rajya Sabha sittings in earlier years were at times fewer but now the two Houses adjourn on the same dates).
Representative governance functions at levels other than national.
The Constitution was crafted in the context of its times.
More specific demands for devolution of powers and for ‘autonomy’ have also been made in Jammu & Kashmir and in Nagaland.
The debate on co-operative federalism was rekindled after the last general election.
Several strident comments on Centre-State relation relations and for ‘a radical rearrangements of the Union-State relationship’ were articulated.
Liberty, equality and fraternity form, as Ambedkar put it, a trinity and divorcing one from the other is to defeat the very purpose of democracy.
The critical link in this chain is provided by equality – substantive and not merely formal.
This has improved further in the past decade.
Urban middle class activism, often taking the form of violence, is being increasingly witnessed; Maoism is an extreme manifestation of it.
‘Where does India’s democratic project stand today?” is the question posed recently by an eminent political scientist.
Committing ourselves 60 years ago to a representative democracy with universal adult suffrage was a progressive step.
Immobility is not an option; nor is certitude bordering on smugness, or panic on an impending doom.
This is our creed and has been reiterated to be so by leaders of governments, past and present.
The question of its fuller implementation remains in the realm of public debate.
This, to me, is the imperative challenge of our times.
Jai Hind.
I am glad to be here today at the Dismissal Service that is so important an event in the academic calendar of the College.
I am not a Stephanian.
I cannot claim total unfamiliarity either.
In more recent times, the College has contributed greatly to the ranks of the elite in all walks of life, including dissenters and rebels.
II Friends The umbilical cord that links an educational institution to its students and alumni is an association of ideas, values and recollections.
You, as seekers of knowledge, came here to initiate and be initiated in the process and to get it right.
There are, of course, less philosophical approaches to the acquisition of knowledge.
There is the view that education should be linked to social purpose and should, in turn, be determined by it.
We in India live in a plural society that is a democratic polity and has a secular state structure.
The ingredients are spelt out in the Constitution.
They are reflective of an imperfect ground reality as also of a perfect ideal.
Together, they constitute the idea of India as perceived by the freedom movement and the founding fathers.
It is readily admitted that each of these is critical to the functioning of India.
The great struggle in modern India has been the struggle for equality.
It has been propelled by awareness, sustained by a moral sense, assisted by education.
Access to education, however, has not been on a uniform pattern; access to good education even less so.
Those who were fortunate enough to have it made headway and constitute the elite.
Six decades later, we find different segments of society living at different levels.
The report of the National Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganised Sector vividly portrays the extent of poverty and vulnerability of a vast section of our people.
Similar reports exist about other weaker sections of society.
Together they paint a picture of denial and deprivation of varying degrees.
III Freedom, said a philosopher, is the appreciation of necessity.
The educated elite, aware of the pitfalls of inequality, have to take the lead in correcting it.
Justice is to be viewed as a moral and a legal imperative.
Equality does not mean identical treatment but does imply a certain levelling process that would open up adequate opportunities to the deprived.
The key to success lies in affirmative action that is targeted yet differentiated.
The state can initiate the process, as indeed it has done; successful completion, however, depends on public participation.
The social purpose of education assumes relevance in this context.
The Stephenian impact on all aspects of national life, ranging from business, bureaucracy and judiciary to theatre, film making, sports and mountaineering, has been considerable and makes them, in fact and in popular perception, a privileged elite.
This privilege of better education, and a better start in life, imposes a duty both to share it and to use it for meaningful correctives.
The ideal Stephenian thus needs to be socially aware and a social activist.
Being better equipped to comprehend, he or she can contribute in greater measure to the application of correctives that would lead us to a more harmonious society.
I thank the College for inviting me today and wish it all success in its endeavours.
Entrapment, however distasteful, does facilitate the thought process!!
I decided to lean in favour of the contentious, to think aloud, and to explore the dimensions of the gender challenge to modern India.
LSR, with its stated mission of ‘empowering women to assume leadership’, is an appropriate forum for such an endeavour.
Ours is a land in the throes of change.
The functional mantra is growth; the guiding principle is inclusive growth.
The underpinning for both is the constitutional stipulation of equality and prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth.
It is, according to Article 51A, a fundamental duty ‘to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women’.
In terms of principles, therefore, citizens of India should be a satisfied lot.
In actuality, they are not.
Their dissatisfaction is of various kinds and has many dimensions.
Gender inequality is one of them.
It affects half the population and is found in all parts of the country and at all levels of society.
The editorial asserted that the initiative for an alternative has to come from ‘toiling women’ who alone are ‘capable of providing the leadership and the militancy that is required to bring about radical changes in this unjust system’.
Let us take nothing for granted.
Law-making in any society is reflective of social perceptions and of social aspirations.
This band-width defines the contours of the social discourse.
In such a context, policy interventions of the State are aimed at correcting the persecution, discrimination and exclusion to which women are subjected.
The instrumentality is affirmative action at levels where the reach of state authority is significant.
We however know from experience in diverse fields that state regulation is a blunt instrument and correctives through it have limited impact on consciousness.
They lead to the unavoidable conclusion that poverty in our country is increasingly getting a feminine profile.
We are thus confronted with a problem that is social as well as economic.
It needs to be addressed in both its dimensions simultaneously.
A recent ILO study has observed that women continue to be ‘an untapped potential’ in South Asia.
It states that economic empowerment of women depends upon their access to labour markets which, in turn, requires ‘equal access to education and equal opportunity in gaining the skills necessary to compete in the labour market.
More women are gaining access to education but equality in education is still’ lacking.
Such a development is ‘critical in the process towards improving equality between men and women’.
Education, and equality in education, is thus a critical element in the agenda of correctives that should be sought.
The more difficult aspect pertains to social perceptions woven in the interstices of the mind and sanctified by tradition.
Government legislation, experience shows, is an inadequate deterrent.
The lead in changing these perceptions and practices has to be taken by individuals and groups in different strata of society.
Srinivas have dwelt on the root causes of the problem.
The Manushi editorial had talked of the ‘whole question’.
Today in the dominant discourse we find it reduced to some questions, more of interest to the educated and the middle classes than to the ‘toiling masses’.
Over the years, the LSR alumna has occupied important leadership positions in academia, government, management and other professional fields.
Perhaps the time has come to add an activist gender-justice dimension to the scoreboard of success.
I thank the College for inviting me today.
I am happy to be here at the inauguration of the 18th World Congress of International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War.
The pioneering work of the organisation and its efforts for peace, health and development need no mention here; it has been awarded the Noble Peace Prize.
The involvement of students and youth as part of these conferences brings in the much-needed dimension of spreading awareness among the future decision makers.
The horrors of the use of nuclear weapons have convinced all responsible nations that elimination of nuclear weapons is necessary.
The principles for a Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) were first proposed by India in 1965.
I am reminded of what the Late Prime Minister Shri Rajiv Gandhi said in a speech before the United Nations.
Ladies and Gentlemen The theme of the Congress, ‘Peace, Health and Development’, is timely.
I wish the Congress all success.
I am happy to be here today at the Annual Day Celebrations of the Shri Ram College of Commerce.
The College has over the past eight decades emerged as a foremost centre of excellence in commerce education in the country.
This can be attributed to the vision of its founder, Sir Shri Ram, and the initiative and drive of its faculty, students and alumni over the years.
The College has done well in inculcating in students the spirit of entrepreneurship and innovation.
I am not an economist but like many others do understand a bit of the wider debate about what used to be known as ‘political economy’.
Business is not an exercise in a vacuum.
The question, in other words, is of the environment in which business functions, its instruments of governance, and the manner in which it interacts with society.
Some in this audience may have read Kautailya’s Arthashastra and its chapter on the management of the state’s treasury and economy.
In today’s world, it is defined in terms of human and material resources.
The rate of growth in recent years has been particularly impressive.
The interaction of the economy with the outside world stands enhanced in good measure.
The first pertains to corporate governance and the second to the meaning and implications of globalization.
Both have a direct impact on all aspects of economic activity and therefore on the lives of all sections of our people.
Both need to be carefully and comprehensively debated by the managerial talent set to graduate from this college.
Ladies and gentlemen Corporate governance has been transformed in recent years.
Institutions like yours have helped the process.
The role of the governments is increasingly regulatory to ensure fairness, transparency and accountability and to protect the interests of all stakeholders.
This is also in tune with efforts to achieve global competitiveness.
One notices a trend to consider Corporate Governance and Corporate Social Responsibility as two distinct entities and in watertight compartments.
It is argued that corporate governance responsibilities are towards shareholders and hence gets primacy over Corporate Social Responsibility that is seen in a voluntary context.
In the rapidly changing social, economic and political context today, both at the national and global level, this distinction is increasingly getting blurred.
Indian corporations going global, and global corporations with Indian operations, need to see both the shareholders and the society; the latter includes the consumers of the goods and services produced by them.
For this reason, corporations need to prioritise their obligations towards society at the same level as towards their shareholders.
It is important that such demands be addressed in a framework that safeguards the interests of all stakeholders.
As a result, Corporate Social Responsibility would increasingly need to be seen in the larger context of corporate governance.
Second, while the extent and complexity of regulation of corporate behaviour have vastly improved in the last decade in our country, it should be remembered that regulation is a blunt instrument.
While regulators and the market are imposing their own discipline on corporate behaviour, a significant measure of self-discipline is not only unavoidable but altogether necessary.
It is heartening that the drive towards corporate governance in India was initiated by the Confederation of Indian Industries (CII) in 1997 and followed up thereafter by SEBI and the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
The A.T.Kearney and Foreign Policy Globalization Index for 2007 places India at number 71 in a list of 72 countries surveyed.
Ladies and Gentlemen I once again thank Shri Ajay Shriram and the Principal for inviting me to the Annual Day Celebrations of the College.
Philanthropy as a social virtue and as a source of public good is inadequately appreciated in our country and insufficiently harnessed.
An enabling social environment helps it in considerable measure.
As a society, and exceptions apart, we must do more on both counts.
This evening we focus on what is an outstanding exception.
The K. K. Birla Foundation deserves appreciation for promoting literature and the arts, and especially for its focus on literature in Hindi and other Indian languages.
Language embodies the soul of a people and the diversity of our languages is expressive of the soul of India.
The Saraswati Samman, along with the Vyas Samman, the Bihari Puraskar and the Vachaspati Puraskar have immensely contributed to recognition of excellence.
Ladies and Gentlemen Dr. Jagannath Das Prasad who has received the Saraswati Samman for 2006 is a very distinguished poetic voice in Post-independence Orissa.
He is also extremely multi-faceted in his artistic pursuits – he is a poet, painter, actor, translator, a cinema critic, short story writer, novelist and dramatist.
The fact that Dr. Das is also an acclaimed translator is also not well known.
Parikrama, the collection of poems for which Dr. Das was awarded the Samman, is indeed a meditation on the art of writing poetry.
This is the second time the Saraswati Samman has been given to an Urdu literary figure.
The short stories of Dr. Masud have emerged as a trendsetter in Urdu fiction.
It is my pleasure to be here today at the Golden Jubilee Foundation Day function of the Maulana Azad Medical College (MAMC).
Since its inception in 1958, it has evolved as a premier institution in medical education in the country.
It is also an institution with a unique history.
Built in a previous jail complex, its role in the pre-independence era is associated with several historical events.
The young medical students of the college today, and their predecessors, have been fortunate to be trained in such an institution.
Ladies and Gentlemen I come to this institution of excellence also to talk about the crisis in medical education in our country.
In terms of public policy, medical education is even more important because it lies at the confluence of education and health.
Medical education in India is highly sought after, resulting in intense competition for every seat available.
The private medical colleges in the country have more than doubled from 60 in 2000 to 131 in 2006.
I would urge medical students to look at specialising in disciplines on considerations other than their market value.
Specialising in areas such as Community Health, Public Health or Preventive and Social Medicine should be encouraged.
We also need to increase the available seats in such disciplines that are very few in comparison to the existing need.
This is a happy occasion and I wish the Golden Jubilee Celebrations of the College all success.
I am also confident that the College will continue further research in basic and applied health sciences and support government healthcare initiatives.
I once again thank Chief Minister Sheila Dikshit for inviting me today.
Confusion about nomenclature is avoidable.
The correct name of this body of water is the Persian Gulf (PG).
This is recognised by the United Nations, the US Department of State, and by historical maps of the region.
This confusion about name is reflected in practical usage; at times we are exclusive and make ‘the Gulf’ synonymous with the GCC, and at others we include all the littoral states in the term.
The Persian Gulf, and its littoral states, has been described as India’s ‘proximate neighbourhood’.
Our task then is to locate India in relation to the PG states.
Iran occupies the whole of the northern coast of the Persian Gulf and has a coastline of 2440 km; Iraq, by contrast, has 58 km.
The narrow entrance to the Persian Gulf in the Straits of Hormuz is controlled on the one side by Iran and on the other by Oman.
Within this general framework, the challenge for India is to develop policy approaches relevant to each of the littoral states.
Domestic stability and regional peace are prerequisites for the Persian Gulf States to continue playing their role as the principal suppliers of oil and gas.
The imperatives of the ‘youth-bulge’, in particular, necessitate immediate responses in terms of social and political reforms.
There is a near-consensus that these reforms need to be evolutionary.
The earlier expectation that political change can be expedited has now been abandoned in favour of stability.
Developments on the domestic scene in each of these states need to be watched and analysed carefully.
The forthcoming Majlis elections in Iran may suggest changes in political equations there.
Stability and cohesion of Iraq remains an open question.
Saudi Arabia and the other GCC states have appeared to imbibe the germs of political change.
Kuwait’s example of the succession question being settled in parliament, rather than in the ruling family, may have wider implications.
The challenge in the immediate future is for the ruling establishments to renew their legitimacy through a process of political liberalisation, cooption and accommodation.
Each society would develop its own road to participatory governance, and should be allowed to do so without external imperatives.
Complexity characterises inter-state relations in the region.
These relate to threat perceptions and national interests and need to be reconciled.
The process would neither be short nor easy but must nevertheless be undertaken.
The littoral states themselves are showing growing awareness of this.
Islamism is an ideology of protest, and of change.
A perceptive observer has noted that ‘Wahabism constructed from above was a pillar of the status quo.
At the same time the low levels of political activity in the GCC states, and the ingrained culture of tribal consensus that persists despite urbanisation, is likely to keep these trends within manageable bounds.
In Iran, and notwithstanding the power struggle within the establishment, the primary orientation of policy will be reflective of national identity and interests.
The economies of all the Persian Gulf states would continue to prosper in the wake of high oil and gas prices.
This would benefit all sections of these societies.
Their integration in the global economy would increasingly reduce the local peculiarities.
These include education, healthcare, construction services, insurance and banking, business and financial services, and tourism.
An area of analysis should be the impact on India of possible changes in the skills-mix of manpower requirements of GCC countries.
No inter-state war appears likely in the region.
Divergent security perceptions, however, would continue to prevail.
Iran would remain apprehensive of external attempts at regime change or an attack against it.
Iraq’s threat perception would be focused on national unity and possible external interference.
All interested parties (including India), therefore, need to develop contingency scenarios to safeguard their interests.
Recent years have witnessed debates about an alternate security architecture for the Persian Gulf.
NATO has been proposed as an option.
Some regional states, and opinion makers, have gingerly suggested a role for larger Asian states like China and India.
Iran’s focus remains riveted on a cooperative security regime of the littoral states.
The smaller littoral states, however, seek security in the involvement of Western powers.
This debate needs to be monitored closely.
The example of CTF 150 is suggestive of an inclination to keep India away from practical arrangements for security of sea lanes in this general area.
The need of the hour is to put these studies on a firmer footing on the basis of cooperation between the academia and the business community.
Today’s seminar, I venture to hope will underline the imperative necessity of such an approach.
It would be in our national interest.
Thank you.
University convocations are location-specific.
The scale and numbers are staggering.
It has been said authoritatively that higher education in our country is facing a crisis.
However, every crisis carries within it the seeds of opportunity, of new possibilities for change and reform.
We have embarked on building a knowledge society.
Increasing the access to higher education has concomitant requirements of enhanced budgetary outlays; increasing the quality of education in conventional campuses has meant increased cost; and, very often, increasing the access has also meant deterioration in the quality of higher education.
The biggest challenge is to provide quality higher education to the greatest number at minimum possible cost to the intended beneficiaries.
Increasingly, distance education has emerged as a critical link in achieving our goal of ushering in a knowledge society.
Distance education in our country has inherent characteristics that are insufficiently appreciated.
A few of these need to be highlighted.
In the first place, distance education is inclusive and encourages marginalised sections of society into the fold of higher education.
Serving the disadvantaged sections of the society was the primary focus of distance education in India.
Around 35% of the fresh students enrolled last year in the university were women and around 25% of them were SC/ST students.
The officer dutifully reported: ‘Verily I have seen a great creature [that is, the sea] ridden by a small one [that is, man].
When it is calm it renders the heart with anxiety, and if it is agitated it leads the mind into confusion.
On it certainty shrinks and doubt increases.
In both cases, perhaps, the immenseness of the body of water and the mysteries in its depths acted as a deterrent.
These examples can be multiplied.
History is witness to great land powers failing to comprehend the relevance of the sea as an instrument of statecraft.
This may be no more than an accident of natural history and the manner in which humans assumed a centrality on this planet.
On the other hand, certain facts relating to this planet of ours may suggest correctives to such a slanted approach.
Earth is a planet of oceans.
They constitute 71 percent of its total area.
In a very real sense, they sustain life on earth.
Cheap transportation is possible through them.
They are in increasing measure a source of food, energy and minerals.
The Indian Ocean is the third largest ocean in terms of area but unquestionably the first in terms of its impact on human civilisation.
The reason for this is obvious; some of the oldest civilisations took shape and blossomed in lands around the Indian Ocean or the seas adjacent to it.
They interacted with each other principally through trade.
II Today’s conference, I believe, goes beyond an exercise in history and ethnology.
Its timing and purpose are sharply focused on the world of today and tomorrow.
A look at recent history provides the perspective.
The Portuguese discovery of the sea route to India was of such critical importance that the King of Portugal thought it fit to reflect it in his formal titles.
The end of the British era saw the enhancement of the role of the United States.
Alongside, the Cold War witnessed super-power rivalry extended itself in the Indian Ocean littoral.
In each of these, the external impulse remained the dominant one.
Whatever be the past, the imperative today is of a qualitatively different situation in the Indian Ocean littoral.
The external impulses have in good measure given way to internal dynamics of individual societies.
This, however, is not easily comprehended and older patterns of thinking persist.
A few years back a scholar in Honolulu delved in futurology pertaining to the Indian Ocean: ‘We do not yet understand the political geography of the 21st century.
In addition, most of the contemporary international conflicts from Iran-Iraq war, to Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom have taken place in the Indian Ocean Region.
There is merit in both sets of arguments.
The quest for security of SLOCs is most vividly demonstrated in the case of Japan where, as shown by Euan Graham in an excellent study published in 2006, it has been the lifeline of the economy and seen as the core security concern.
In this globalised world of today, 95% of world trade is conducted through the sea.
Roughly 40% of this sea-borne trade is accounted for by the Straits of Malacca.
The Persian Gulf and adjoining region accounts for 50% of the world’s containerised cargo and 33% of bulk cargo.
Every day 15.5 million barrels of oil, or 40% of the entire global oil trade passes through the Straits of Hormuz and 11 million barrels of oil pass through the Malacca and Singapore Straits.
The SLOC argument, valid in itself, is nevertheless reflective of partial reality.
It supports life on earth, regulates temperatures, humidity, rainfall and seasons.
It can and does generate catastrophic convulsions affecting the human race.
III Throughout recorded history, maritime security has been the prime concern of states and of their nationals undertaking international trade.
In an earlier era, piracy by entrepreneurs for themselves or on behalf of states was common.
Then came a time when the balance of advantage was found to lie in the suppression of piracy.
The same pattern was followed in regard to slave trade.
In the past, initiatives for maritime security generally emanated from a strong power driven principally by express or tacit hegemonic perceptions.
They received cooperation at times and aroused apprehensions at others.
In conceptual terms, the requirement of maritime security is of necessity linked to threat perception.
In the period of the Cold War, security perceptions were based on identified threats and on the need to contain them.
The approach, therefore, was cooperative amongst allies and competitive in relation to perceived enemies.
In the period after 1990, the focus shifted and attention came to be riveted on questions of common concern.
The expectation was that a more comprehensive cooperative approach, on a non-discriminatory basis, would gradually take shape.
The voyage even to this point has not been eventless.
The recent effort at pursuing security at choke points in the Indian Ocean was highly selective and predominantly extra-regional.
It functions through a Coalition Task Force known as CTF 150 and includes ships principally from the navies of the United States, UK, Australia, Germany, Italy and France.
Its three non-NATO members are Australia, New Zealand and Pakistan.
It is currently led by the Pakistani Navy.
In September 2006 the three states convened a larger meeting under the International Maritime Organisation’s Protection of Vital Shipping Lanes Initiative.
It was attended by 34 countries included 11 Indian Ocean littoral states.
Also in September 2006, the Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery Against Ships in Asia (ReCAAP) came into force involving ASEAN, Japan, China, South Korea, India, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka.
Subsequent meetings have reinforced the need for cooperation between the littoral states, user states and users of the Straits of Malacca and Singapore.
A cooperative mechanism has also been established.
The difference between the two approaches, in respect to the western and the eastern choke points respectively, is significant.
This gathering would, undoubtedly, make its own judgements.
IV Security against anticipated threats is one aspect of the matter.
In human terms, situations created by natural disasters and accidents are equally relevant.
Tsunamis and cyclones take a heavy toll every year.
70 percent of the world’s natural disasters take place in the Indian Ocean region.
Environmental disasters, oil spills etc hold the potential for large-scale damage.
These happenings do not respect national boundaries.
The response, accordingly, has to go beyond national efforts to be meaningful.
A very good example of international cooperation is the effort mounted after the December 2004 tsunami.
The Indian Navy undertook a commendable operation on that occasion.
More recently, the Indian Navy provided help and succour to the victims of the earthquake in Indonesia.
Gentlemen The innate sense of curiosity of the human mind, and the progress of science, has opened the doors on the mysteries of the sea.
These, when unravelled, indicate the immensity of resources that the oceans possess.
These can be accessed rationally or irrationally.
Our generation has not been slow to learn lessons from the past.
While exploratory ventures have been made, the consensus at this stage is that technology for economic mining of the ocean depths is probably a decade away.
V Given the diversity of ocean-related activities of humankind, the responsibility of undertaking them is shouldered by various segments of society.
Each of these requires an atmosphere of peace and stability.
The challenge always is to ensure that contention and cooperation are in harmony.
The totality of objectives sought to be achieved in the Indian Ocean region by the littoral, hinterland and user states can only be achieved through a methodology of cooperation.
It has been said, with justice, that the narrative of conflict, as advanced by belligerents, is always one of grievance.
The causes, conditions and consequences of conflict almost invariably relate to economic, social and environmental factors.
Each of these is better addressed by common endeavour.
The Indian Ocean Region is among the fastest growing regions of the world.
The existing structure of cooperation in this broad region is primarily based around five groupings, namely ASEAN, GCC, SAARC, SADC and SCO.
These are not formally linked to each other; their overlapping and overarching framework is an implicit recognition of each other’s sensitivities and concerns.
It is also reflective of the tenuous equilibrium of the region.
An earlier effort, to create an Indian Ocean Rim grouping, did not produce the desired results.
Within the region, and around it, are important political and economic powers that have a stake in peace, stability and progress.
They could form the nucleus of an eventual Asian Economic Community.
Gentlemen India is and will remain a maritime nation.
In keeping with its maritime heritage, its overseas presence would be based on its soft power and cooperation.
The evolution of perceptions takes time.
The key to the future, in the words of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, is the development of new synergies.
This needs to be a comprehensive endeavour.
A convergence of interests in the maintenance of peace and in the creation of a co-prosperity area would greatly facilitate the effort.
This gathering of the Chiefs of Navies of the Indian Ocean region attends to one aspect of the matter.
I thank Admiral Sureesh Mehta for inviting me to address this distinguished gathering.
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, Mr. Derek O’Brian is a good friend.
I agree to his suggestions on occasions, disagree on others.
Such is the nature of his public responsibilities, and of mine!
There are also occasions when our hearts and minds converge.
This is one such occasion.
She was already venerated by millions of Indians, cutting across religious, caste and regional divides.
For the people of India, she was already a saint.
She addressed the complex questions about the meaning of life by reducing it to the simple practice of alleviating the pain of others.
She dedicated her entire life to serving the poorest of the poor, the destitute and forsaken.
She undertook her work with love and commitment, provided dignity and respect to those who had been defeated by life.
She was a messiah of the poor and a pillar of support for the weak and suffering.
Her simple manners touched the hearts of millions of people of all faiths.
They are joined by thousands of volunteers who help run free kitchens, leprosy centers, health clinics, hospitals, hospices, schools and many other affiliated health and social services organizations.
Her message of love continues to inspire millions of people around the world.
World leaders have recognized her as an inspiration.
Yet she saw herself as one among the needy, one among the poor, dying and destitute.
She identified herself with them.
She demonstrated that a person could live a faith-filled life even when in agony and doubt.
Her work, though touching every social ill, was not only, or even primarily social work.
She dedicated her life to the cause of humanity.
“Not all of us can do great things, but we can do small things with great love”.
And if she thought much about her critics, perhaps it was when she prayed for mercy for them.
Her mission and message have touched not only the poorest of the poor here, but those well beyond India.
It inspires us, as that of Mahatma Gandhi, another great Indian whose birth anniversary we celebrate today.
Jai Hind.
It is a matter of concern that many Indian companies are finding it progressively harder to adapt to this competitive and restrictive scenario.
For many Indian firms, competition per se is a new phenomenon.
Indian businesses have traditionally been risk averse.
Most Indian firms, barring a few notable examples, lack sufficient grounding and experience in global competition because of the absence of intense inter-firm rivalry in the domestic business environment.
Additionally, prolonged government protection has left them feeling complacent and ill-prepared to wage competitive battles at global level.
There is a genuine need for change in the internal environment of Indian firms that can foster competitive thinking and behaviour.
These inherent weaknesses of our corporate are compounded by the slow international growth over the last few years and the so called ‘debt-addiction’ of Indian firms.
As signs of the economic slowdown became evident, investment in equity markets stagnated, but corporate India continued to generate debt.
At the same time, net profits decreased by 32%.
We are globally recognized for our services sector that contributes more than 60% to India’s GDP.
A large and populous nation like India needs manufacturing to be a significant part of its Gross Domestic Product (GDP) to ensure higher employment and prosperity.
While domestic consumption in our country is on the rise, making quick and deep inroads into overseas markets will help us accelerate growth.
Further, for profitable growth, we have to strive for a premium that will accrue only if we target products that need high quality design, engineering and manufacturing.
Indian manufacturing, however, needs to improve dramatically in terms of productivity and efficiency to compete in a globalized market.
In 2010-12, TFP contributed 11% to GDP growth in India.
By comparison, its share in China's GDP growth was 26%.
Currently, most Indian companies operate at the bottom of the global value chain by selling components or unbranded products.
This is true even of our firms in the Services sector.
The test before our companies is to develop business capabilities that equip them to compete at the top of the value chain.
However, our much-vaunted cost advantage may not be adequate to compete with other large producers on the world stage.
Given the relative size of domestic markets, it is unlikely in the near term that our firms will be able to achieve the scale that their competitors in East Asia have established for several products.
The advantage of scale, coupled with cost advantage and strong government backing, still make it challenging for us to compete on costs for most products, despite the increasing labour costs there.
In addition, the changing nature of manufacturing- with the advent of new manufacturing techniques like 3-D printing, robotics and automation creates newer challenges for Indian firms.
The challenges to the IT and Pharmaceutical sector are not dissimilar to the challenges before the other Indian manufacturers.
Overcoming these challenges and the future growth of our companies will be in being able to create futuristic business scenarios and engineering disruptions rather than coping with its aftermath.
In short, our firms will have to be more innovative.
He had said “The world is changing quicker than ever before and we cannot remain oblivious to that.
Yet, innovation does not happen in a vacuum, or just because it is desired.
Such a dismal show is not surprising given our low levels of investment in Research and Development (R&D).
Siemens, the German engineering giant, spent 5% of its revenues on R&D.
We need to eventually work towards inculcating the ‘culture and attitudes’ needed to foster innovation and entrepreneurship.
A former Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, in a talk at IIT Delhi, had listed out some ways for a nation “to keep the idea factory open”.
We have seen cases in Indian business where an inspirational leadership style brings dynamism to a company.
The business leader in whose memory these awards have been instituted was one such visionary.
The worthy recipient of this award, Shri N. Chandrashekharan, is an inheritor to great legacies of corporate leadership and has worked to take Tata companies to greater heights.
I congratulate him for his achievements and hope that his example will continue to inspire Indian business leaders to excellence.
Jai Hind.
The encyclopaedic personality of Damodar Dharmanand Kosambi endeared him to scholars beyond the fields of mathematics and numismatics.
Basham, author of The Wonder that was India, who became a lifelong friend.
There is little evidence to suggest that peaceful resolution of conflicts within societies was amongst his priorities.
My quest today would be to explore the passion for peace, and its relevance to the world in our own times.
II We are confronted with a contradiction of serious dimensions.
A look at human history makes evident the role of violence.
At the same time the passion for peace is a perennial in human history.
Sovereignty in this form existed before it was conceptualised.
Domination was one form of achieving it; hence the expressions Pax Romana, Pax Brittanica etc.
This was not found to be perpetual or all embracing.
Hence the need for conflict management or resolution through rules of behaviour that came to be known as international law of peace and war.
A methodology for conflict resolution is to be found in all societies.
Kautilya refers to six methods of seeking conciliation.
In modern times, the conceptual and the practical endeavour to seek peace between nations took shape in post-Renaissance Europe.
Publicists like Grotius pioneered it; theoretical depth was added by philosophers like Immanuel Kant in his tract on Perpetual Peace wherein he argued that peace must be established through conscious effort based on a mutuality of interest.
The dominant impulse in the 18th and 19th centuries was promotion of commerce through domination and war.
The other viewpoint, nevertheless, had its votaries.
Serious thinking on the futility of war, however, had to await the experience and blood letting of World Wars I and II.
In August 1945 Prime Minister Atlee committed Britain to utilise atomic energy ‘not for our own ends but as trustees for humanity in the interest of all people in order to promote peace and justice in the world’.
President Truman did likewise.
The Preamble of the UN Charter begins by expressing a determination ‘to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war’.
Removal of threats to peace thus became a primary purpose of the United Nations.
Five decades later only partial success can be attributed to it and war, defined as organised violence between states, is still considered an instrument of policy to achieve objectives.
In such a context, the effort necessarily remains confined to the management of global insecurity.
Boutros Ghali’s Agenda for Peace was structured on that premise.
Much work has been done in the past decade and a half to develop the framework for peace keeping, peace building, and conflict prevention.
The approach, however, is riveted on prevention rather than cure.
In 1988 Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi told the United Nations that ‘in consequence of doctrines of deterrence, international relations have been gravely militarised’ and that ‘peace which rests on the search for a parity of power is a precarious peace’.
He proposed a time-bound Action Programme for a Nuclear-Free World and the initiation of negotiations to establish a Comprehensive Global Security System under the aegis of the United Nations.
A world without nuclear weapons requires ‘the necessary political will to build an international consensus on priorities’.
This, they concede, cannot be done ‘without the vision of moving towards zero, we will not find the essential cooperation required to stop our downward spiral’.
These views were most recently articulated in an op-ed in The Wall Street Journal on January 18 this year.
A study of the semantic history of the term itself is revealing.
Early in the twentieth century the philosopher William James had recognised the obstacles confronting a pacifist approach.
‘The war against war’, he wrote in 1906, ‘is going to be no holiday or camping party.
They want their people to see war as a drama of opposites, good and evil, ‘them’ and ‘us’, victory or defeat.
But war is primarily not about victory or defeat but about death and the infliction of death.
In such a scheme of things, there can be no exceptions.
Local or regional wars would nevertheless continue to erupt.
Every such conflict would be disruptive of development and enhance human misery.
A new mechanism for conflict prevention is thus essential.
A new, and hitherto unexplored, area for future conflicts resides in the imperatives of the current and future competition for resources, of climate change and of wider environmental questions.
Economic historian Angus Matterson has noted that humanity’s average real income per head has risen 10-fold since 1820.
Technology and resource availability have been critical to the effort.
At the same time, an emerging contradiction is also becoming evident.
Technology continues to improve but declining availability of resources is generating fear, and responses bordering on panic.
In the final analysis, then, we see merit in Kosambi’s vision that peace was a pre-requisite for development and that true peace required true democracy where all human beings are equal.
The struggle for world peace must therefore be a quest for equality, justice and democracy.
I come also to salute an institution whose dedication to its mission is exemplary and foremost amongst them is a passion for excellence.
Ladies and gentlemen History records that the rise and fall of civilisations is closely related to knowledge creation and its utilization for human advancement through techniques of production and distribution.
It is a public good, a basic human right, a fundamental right, and an important instrumentality for social and economic empowerment.
How then do we approach the question of education, in relation to itself and in relation to society?
In a word, the way we work and the way we live both necessitate a change in the way we educate ourselves.
The advancing tide of globalisation means that the quality of knowledge generated within higher education institutions, and its availability to the wider economy, is becoming increasingly critical to national competitiveness.
Education, therefore, has to respond to the imperative of a qualitatively new situation.
The challenge is to be met at all levels: primary and secondary and higher education.
It is also to be addressed in institutions of vocational training.
Logical sequence and pragmatic necessity both suggest a bottom-up approach.
About 2 crore children are born every year.
Around 7 percent of the children do not attend school between the age group 6 to 14.
At both levels the pass percentage is 50-55 percent.
Only 6 percent enter the university system and only 4-5 percent opts for vocational education.
The next stage in the education pyramid is the question of higher education.
The National Knowledge Commission, in its report on the subject presented to the Prime Minister in January 2007, summed up the situation: ‘There is a quiet crisis in higher education in India.
"The reality is that we have	miles to go."
In his address to the National Development Council last month, the Prime Minister gave details of the Eleventh Plan targets in education.
Dereliction on any count would impact negatively on the overall performance.
Two questions unavoidably arise: The ground reality is grim.
We have at present over 350 universities and around 17,700 colleges.
The total number of teachers is around 4.7 lakhs.
The gross enrolment ratio, defined as the number of students enrolled as a percentage of the population in the 18-20 age groups, is around 10%.
The comparative figure for the most developed countries is over 50 percent; the world average is around 23%.
It is clear that access to higher education in India needs to be improved significantly.
As regards the poor and the marginalised sections of our society, and some minority groups, their enrolment in higher education is significantly lower than the national average.
There are also overlapping categories between the various disadvantaged groups.
Consequently, the input into our higher education system is neither broad-based nor inclusive.
An equally relevant question is that of quality.
Our principal pillar of higher education is the undergraduate college network.
Undergraduate education accounts for over 85% of enrolled students, seeking first degrees in arts, commerce and science.
Most of the remaining do not comply with the minimum infrastructural and academic standards.
The problems of access and equity are thus compounded by the question of quality.
Two results are evident: education has become business, and there is business in education.
Markets and globalization are shaping the content of higher education and exercising an influence on the nature of institutions that impart higher education.
These compel us to think.
"Professor Deepak Nayyar has suggested a proactive approach to the problem: ‘We should not allow markets and globalization to shape	higher education."
The national effort directed at the educational pyramid must therefore harmonise the objectives and develop synergies.
One last word before I conclude.
This is a Convocation with a difference – that of an autonomous college.
The students graduating today follow an illustrious lineage.
They have demonstrated academic excellence.
This was the easier part of the endeavour.
As Xaverians, they bear a life long responsibility for a wider concern pertaining to humanity.
Let ‘Nihil Ultra’ – the motto of this institution, be their guiding principle.
Once again, I thank Father Mathew for extending to me the privilege of addressing the first Convocation of St. Xavier’s.
It is an honour for me to be present today at the closing ceremony of the Sesqui-Centenary celebrations of the Bengal Engineering and Science University.
It is a unique experience to be in an institution founded in 1856, one year prior to the first war of independence.
It has also been a long journey from the Bishop's College in British India to the Bengal Engineering College in independent India, then on to a deemed University and finally to a State University.
Engineering and technical education in the country occupies a critical role in our knowledge economy.
While India produces over 400,000 engineers every year, it is nowhere close to the number of engineers required by our industry and economy.
The skills deficit that we face in our country needs to be remedied at the earliest.
Remedial measures have a long gestation period, yet the first step in that direction must be taken today.
I would like to emphasize on four issues that must be addressed to raise the standards of technical education in the country.
First, the general quality of engineering and technical college faculty in the country leaves much to be desired.
Our premier engineering colleges fail to attract and retain the best of their faculty.
We need to revisit the terms and conditions guiding the appointment of faculty members and have systemic flexibility to enable engineering institutions to attract and retain talented faculty.
Second, industry-academia interaction is currently limited to some of the elite institutions and is not a generic feature of engineering and technical institutions.
This should be remedied and the curriculum and teaching methodologies should take into account the relevance of engineering education for Indian industry and economy.
The first step towards enhancing interaction of engineering colleges with industry is through the faculty of these institutions.
We must facilitate their temporary movement to the industry to gain experience and knowledge of the latest and best industry practices.
Third, engineering and technical institutions should serve as foci of research and development activities.
Unfortunately, over the years, engineering colleges have not fostered R&D activities.
This needs to change.
Fourth, the inter-linkages between the various levels of the engineering and technical education pyramid have weakened over the years.
The linkages between vocational and technical institutes, polytechnics, state-level engineering and technical colleges and elite national institutions such as NITs and IITs have frayed.
The regulatory mechanisms governing these various levels are also different further weakening the exchange of information and expertise across them.
We need to examine how best to strengthen such linkages.
Ladies and Gentlemen I am happy to learn that the Government of India has identified this institution to be upgraded to an Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology.
This is recognition of the service rendered by the institution to the nation over the last century and a half.
Full credit for this illustrious heritage goes to the past and current community of faculty members, staff and students.
Nature is evolutionary, but has occasional spurts of cataclysmic activity and tectonic shifts.
The University of Panjab was born at Simla in 1882 and prospered at Lahore.
Panjab University, however, took shape in difficult times in 1947 and has made a name for itself through the grit and excellence of students, researchers and teachers.
I, therefore, deem it a privilege to be its Chancellor and to preside over this Convocation.
For this reason alone, the annual Convocation is an event of significance since it marks the formal completion of the first stage of that journey.
Since the beginning of time, humankind has debated the meaning of existence.
A century earlier, a university degree was considered a recipe for steady and dignified existence in a society characterised by settled equations and relationships.
Times, perceptions and objectives have changed.
If change is one factor in life, continuity is another.
We cannot forget the past for the simple reason that it is an important ingredient of our identity.
In such an endeavour, each institution imprints its own uniqueness on the process and the product.
Panjab University has distinguished itself by its work in different fields.
The University has played a significant role in Punjab’s overall contribution to national life.
Panjab University has emerged as a significant centre for scientific research.
It has been recognised by the UGC as a ‘University with a potential for excellence in bio-medical sciences’.
Some of its research in humanities has been widely acclaimed.
No less important is its work on the culture of Punjab; I recently came across a perceptive work on the representation of Shaheed Bhagat Singh in folk literature.
In one aspect, this university occupies a unique place.
This road beyond our land borders in the west proceeds to Lahore, Kabul, Balkh, Bokhara and beyond.
The possibilities are endless, bound only by our collective imagination and our commitment to regional cooperation to mutual benefit.
It is in the detached precincts of a university that these exercises in futurology can be undertaken.
I felicitate the students graduating today and wish all success in life.
I am confident that they would hold aloft the banner of the university in the next stage of their lives.
Thank you.
His critical role in synthesizing India's scientific, medical and artistic genius is under-appreciated.
Its purpose, ‘to encourage the original, often speculative, thinking that produces advances in knowledge’ has been fulfilled in good measure.
In India we made the first effort in 1964 with the Indian Institute of Advanced Study, Shimla.
Its mentor was none other than President Sarvapelli Radhakrishnan.
The aim was to facilitate free and creative inquiry into the themes and problems of life and thought.
JRD Tata’s approach, in 1988, was somewhat more focused.
He recognized that in the Indian context a multidisciplinary approach and bringing together of civil servants and managers from industry, leaders in public affairs, eminent personalities and academic scholars from the natural and social sciences was important for public policy formulation and implementation.
Ladies and gentlemen We live in an age where the only constant is change.
The physical, mental and virtual landscape around us is being rapidly transformed, imposing constant demands on individuals and institutions to adapt and reinvent themselves.
In its wake one tends to lose sight of the inherent unity in nature and the impulse for harmony.
This was understood, even practiced, in an earlier age when inter-disciplinary studies facilitated cross-pollination of ideas.
Overtime, however, what commenced as a functional division of work tended to crystallize into rigid boundaries.
The problem has been accentuated by the structure of our higher education system and of our research institutions.
Increasingly universities have parted ways with research and development activities; even within the universities, academic pursuits are rigidly delineated within specific departments.
As a result, the intellectual output of our universities leaves much to be desired.
Against such a bleak backdrop, the National Institute of Advanced Studies is an oasis.
The books, reports, working papers published by it bear testimony to the scope of work being done and are perhaps unique for an Indian academic institution.
Such a multi-disciplinary approach is critical to the advancement of knowledge.
John Adams once said: “I must study politics and war that my sons may have liberty to study mathematics and philosophy.
Each generation makes its own judgment about the success of the endeavour.
The important thing is to create conditions conducive to undertaking the walk.
NIAS contributes to this effort; so will the Centenary Faculty Block.
I thank the Institute for inviting me today and take this opportunity to convey my best wishes to the faculty, staff and students of this Institute.
An Agricultural University is the place where theory embraced practice, when the results of learning are presented to the practitioners, to be tested in practice.
An agricultural fair in such a University thus becomes a gathering of farmers, entrepreneurs, farm scientists and extension workers from all the southern states of India.
Our agricultural and food processing sectors, and traditional agro rural industries has tremendous opportunities for growth, especially export-led growth.
However, the usage of outdated technology and lack of value addition is preventing the advancement of these sectors.
This Fair is an important platform to explore the possibility of product diversification and value addition that are critical for strengthening the domestic and export market.
Agricultural Fairs constitute a key component of the economic life of the rural India.
These, sustain our rural economy to a significant extent in terms of employment generation and providing livelihood to a multitude of our population.
These are an important link between the urban and the rural India to give new impetus to the agricultural sector for further expansion and promotion.
This I am sure will give new direction to the future of the agricultural sector.
Agricultural researchers in pursuit of professional excellence should not deviate from farmer priorities, which is the very survival and progress of our country.
Our institutions of Governance need to keep in mind the interests of farmers while allocating the budgetary resources and in implementing the policies and programmes meant for them.
Over a period of time, the agricultural sector has developed deeper interface with market economy through which the growth and development of other sectors of the economy have been facilitated.
In India, agricultural GDP comprises about ¼ of total GDP (22%) and generates16% of the value of total exports.
My emphasis on the role of the agriculture sector has wider relevance.
For the country as a whole, the current share of agriculture in GDP is around 18.5%, that of services is 55% and of industry around 26%.
The growth rate in the agriculture sector has been a mere 2.7% in the last financial year.
Yet, more than half of the population directly depends on this sector.
It also provides livelihood to 58% of the total population especially in the rural areas.
However, the agricultural scenario in the country has been witnessing sweeping changes in the last two decades as regards shifting priorities resulting in reduced tariffs, liberalized trade barriers, and dismantled restrictions on domestic and foreign private investment.
Friends, inclusiveness of growth is our national philosophy and the adverse impact of the low growth in agriculture has implications for it.
There is therefore a need to refocus our efforts on the agricultural sector in the country.
I venture to say that the Government of India’s proposed push to agriculture through a Second Green Revolution needs to be considered as thrust area.
Despite some recent signs of a slowdown, the economy is poised to grow at least at a rate of nine per cent.
Services and industry are going to be the main contributors to growth.
However, even with such growth, the per capita income of people dependent on agriculture will be less than that of those engaged in other sectors.
The annual increase in per capita GDP for the agrarian population will be less than one per cent, while the rest of the population will be at eight times that rate.
This can be attributed to the low per capita output of farms, which needs to be addressed on a priority.
The interests of the small and marginal farmers and peasants of our country have to be integrated with the greater objective of economic growth of the country through the strengthening of social safety nets for these vulnerable groups.
Globalisation has had a negative impact on the Small-scale industries, which are in shambles, and their products are not competitive and are often ignored even in domestic markets.
In order to tackle these issues, a paradigm shift is called for to target the postproduction scenario through value addition and product diversification by integrating technologies, institutions and markets.
The agricultural sector has to be equipped with the capabilities to explore the opportunities thrown open by the globalized economy.
Keeping in view the importance of agricultural sector in the national economy, it has been given the status of Thrust Area for its overall development.
As this sector also contributes significantly towards export earnings, emphasis on training in modern techniques of production, management and marketing plays an important role.
This training also helps to improve the techniques, capacities, and strategies to withstand the competition in the present globalised economy.
In this regard, the Governmental initiatives are indeed have a positive impact.
The diversification of Indian agriculture to dairying, poultry, fisheries, meat, vegetables and fruits has an important role to play to give push to farm growth.
Domestic demand, which is the main economic driver of any commodity, is in favour of these products.
Agricultural Fairs can provide avenues to further the demand for the agro products.
Agricultural universities, farm research centres, agro-based industries and development departments are indeed crucial actors in the success of the agricultural fairs.
As the farming systems evolve rapidly, level of commercialization also increased, giving way to mixed farming systems, which respond rapidly to market forces.
In this emerging context the South Indian states with potential for export of cash crops like spices, coffee, tea, rubber, silk, sandalwood, fruits and vegetables have become major economic players.
These states are also rich in livestock wealth besides endowed with immense marine and inland fisheries wealth.
There is a great need to integrate the crop, livestock and fisheries sectors to augment value addition and diversification in agriculture.
Moreover, it also provides an opportunity for the inclusion of rural women who play a vital role in all stages of crop production to harness the new world opportunities.
We need to organize agriculture, animal husbandry and aquaculture activities on modern and scientific lines.
Good agricultural practices (GAP) and good manufacturing practices (GMP) have to be ensured from the point of production to the point of product marketing to ensure international standards.
The onus for this rests with the researchers, policy makers, entrepreneurs, investors and technology disseminators.
Agricultural Fairs needs to be fully utilized to tap the agro-economic potential of the southern states.
A focus on agro rural industry would be the most effective way of generating employment.
It could explore the opportunities for imparting entrepreneurial skills to the unemployed so that they can use their energy and enthusiasm to start out on their own, thus creating jobs and prosperity.
The Agricultural Fairs have a great relevance in the face of increasing competition and provide an opportunity to become global players.
Globalisation has given new demand to the agro products because of a shift in the consumer culture.
The free movement of goods and capital has provided immense opportunities to our agriculturists to sell their products to the outside world, and also bring in products of other countries.
This has opened a new culture of competition, which can only be sustained through protection, and promotion of our agricultural markets.
This is possible only when we accord top priority to the agriculture in our policy framework.
I commend the Kerala Agricultural University for taking the initiative to organise this Agricultural Fair.
Such efforts, I am sure shall inspire confidence in the farmers, researchers and the entrepreneurs to look toward a bright future with optimism.
I thank the University, His Excellency the Governor and others for providing me the opportunity to address this distinguished gathering.
Thank you
The ultimate freedom of our country from the British rule in August 1947 was the culmination of hundreds of regional and subsequently national struggles spread all over India.
It is a known and accepted fact Veera Pazhassi was a heroic and valiant fighter who can be placed on an equal pedestal with other great heroes of the Freedom Struggle in all parts of India.
Pazhassi Raja Kerala Varma was one of our country’s first freedom fighters.
He fought against regional encroachment and foreign domination.
His military genius lay in the fact that he made effective use of intelligence and guerrilla tactics against more powerful enemies.
Pazhassi’s first revolt against the British began in 1793.
The people were unhappy over the tax collections and the neglect of their welfare.
The British selected a pliable administrator for Kottayam, ignoring Pazhassi’s claim and gave him complete authority.
Kerala Varma was a formidable enemy for the British to subdue.
Even when his palace was ransacked and he had to seek refuge in the jungles, he continued to frustrate their efforts with his guerrilla tactics.
With help of tribals and an uncanny knowledge of the jungle, he and his men indulged in guerrilla warfare that depleted the strength of the British forces.
This year I have the pleasant duty of awarding the ‘Dharmakhadga’, the Sword of Justice to one of the all time veterans in the field of law and social justice, Justice V.R.
Jai Hind.
Yet, a free press is neither a privilege nor a luxury for any democracy; it is a basic necessity for democratic survival.
From about the beginning of the 19th century, politically conscious Indians focused attention on the freedom of the press.
Increasingly, Indian newspapers became identified with the freedom struggle.
Gandhiji brought forth a new era in Indian journalism.
He was probably the first editor in the history of Indian journalism to have started a newspaper for the express purpose of breaking the law governing the publication of newspapers.
His political and social messages were conveyed through the press.
He was also one of the first editors prosecuted for sedition.
Nor was he alone; many other leaders of the freedom movement suffered the same fate but remained undeterred.
The diversity of the Indian press in the pre-Independence period was as heterogeneous as the Indian polity.
This, along with boldness, has become the core DNA of our press.
Both are cherished assets in an open society.
Amongst the pillars of democracy, only the media has an identifiable business and commercial persona.
Today’s media organizations are large business entities with thousands of employees and huge financial and other assets.
The interplay of these conflicting demands is evident and subject of public debate.
There are complaints of erosion of news values and of a focus on personalities rather than issues and processes.
The emergence of the Internet and 24x7 television reporting has put additional pressure on the print media.
These developments lead to a few questions: There are no easy answers to these questions.
An Award of this nature would spur media organizations to work for professional excellence and the higher good of public interest.
Thank you.
Neither of these, let me add, was totally exclusive.
By the time of his death in 1998, some of the major premises of his belief system – democracy, secularism, socialism, nonalignment – had come under pressure and were the cause of disillusionment.
Elsewhere, he expressed surprise over the ‘symptoms of of utter confusion in its value system’ displayed by the Indian society in a period of change.
He pointed to the difficulties encountered in studying ‘the changes in mass consciousness in a revolutionary epoch’.
The two are different aspects of the same objective, for a humane and peaceable India is not possible if it lives in an aggressive world atmosphere’.
The sequence is not alphabetical and its logic is not difficult to comprehend.
Distributive justice is writ large and has been so understood.
It connotes the removal of injustice resulting from transactions between un-equals in society.
The law does not define ‘humane’ or humaneness.
This is evident in our own times in Mahatma Gandhi’s teachings and in Ambedkar’s definition of Dharma as ‘righteousness, which means right relations between man and man in all spheres of life’ and is, of necessity, social.
It is also the essence of morality.
These are listed on the tablet: Each of these is a statement of principle that can be comprehended, interpreted and implemented, individually and collectively.
On my part, I would like to discern a pattern in the last words of each dictum: principle, conscience, work, character, morality, humanity and sacrifice.
In the Gandhian approach, therefore, conscience is motivated by considerations of humanity and sacrifice to develop a moral character that holds aloft in its work the banner of a principled approach.
The argument had a limited time span.
State misbehaviour contributed to it in good measure.
The end of World War I saw the beginning of systematic efforts to circumscribe the unchecked conduct of states.
World War II gave it an impetus and led to the Charter of the United Nations.
International covenants in the past seven decades have put paid to the doctrine of absolute sovereignty and to the unchecked behaviour of states.
III  A parallel evolution was witnessed in regard to the behaviour of the State within its domestic jurisdiction.
The principle of rule of law, and of responsible and responsive governance, is no longer disputed and is being implemented in increasing measure.
Yet, the horizon is not all dark.
Advancement in communication and transportation has facilitated the process of globalization of this civil society movement.
This development has been critical in emphasising the primacy of fundamental and universal human rights, not only as a basic norm of State behaviour but also in the behaviour of individuals towards each other.
Human rights, in varying degrees, have been internalised voluntarily or on account of external pressures.
The drive for greater transparency in State behaviour was intended to make State actors accountable.
The challenge lies in addressing it because individuals are the building blocks of societies.
They are also the principal actors in political life of societies and determine its character by their principles and conduct.
IV A transition from the general to the particular is essential to carry the argument forward.
The Indian society of today, despite its moorings in religion and tradition, is increasingly prone to be amoral in the behaviour of its individual and group components.
Political corruption is defined as the misuse of public office for private gain.
Mahatma Gandhi’s outburst in 1939 is indicative of its presence even in the period before Independence.
An official acknowledgement of the problem of corruption came from Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh in August 2004.
The challenge is to comprehend, and confront, the question in its totality.
Corruption is as much moral as a development issue.
It tends to distort the decision-making processes on investment projects and other commercial transactions.
It impacts at the foundations of the social and political fabric of society.
It increases injustice and disregard for the rule of law.
A good example is the First Report of the Ethics Committee of the Rajya Sabha, in December 1998.
"At concerned	 quarters views are being expressed over the general decline in moral and ethical standards in public life."
The Committee has itself noted the general decline in moral and ethical standards in public life.
In such a situation, the representatives of the people have to set high standards of behaviour in public life.
Members of Parliament have not only to represent the society but have also to lead it.
This tendency, the Committee painfully observes, is now on a decline’.
It recommended a model Code of Conduct, of a general nature, for the members of the Rajya Sabha.
The argument thus returns to its point of commencement.
The imperative of ethics in public life is eventually a matter of conscience, of morality, of a sense of values in relation to right and wrong, good and bad, just and unjust, humane and cruel.
The perceived dichotomy between public and the private behaviour of individuals, therefore, does not exist in ethical terms and must not exist in practice.
Conscience, in other words, may need to be jostled from time to time.
The duty of the State, and of the civil society, is to be proactive in the matter.
Only then would the moral realm in public life become meaningful and make India of the future truly free, just and humane.
Thank you.
I am accompanied by Minister of State, Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal, and by some Members of the Indian Parliament.
We bring to you the greetings and best wishes of the people of India.
In recent years we have sought to close the distance that separates us physically.
We were happy to welcome His Excellency President Ibrahim BoubacarKeïta when he participated in the 3rd India - Africa Forum Summit hosted by India in October last year.
We value the contribution of Mali to the success of the Summit.
Much has been said about the long and illustrious history that connects Africa and India.
The African impact on India is found in our genetic make-up, cultural and linguistic traditions, our artefacts, gastronomic choices, and our common world view.
We shared a colonial past and India’s independence had a positive impact on anti-colonialism and freedom movements in Africa.
After India gained its independence in 1947, we became a leading voice in the United Nations to promote decolonisation.
The first UN resolution against apartheid in South Africa was sponsored by India.
My visit, the first high level visit to Mali from India, takes place at a time of excellent bilateral relations between India and Mali.
My visit comes at a time when the world is acknowledging the India growth story.
This economic growth provides India more resources not just for its own development, but also more financial leverage in expanding the scope of its engagement with emerging growth poles of the world like Africa.
India’s commitment to its partnership with Africa was underlined by Prime Minister Narendra Modi when he depicted it as:“a relationship that is beyond strategic considerations.
It is a relationship with a strong emotional link.
Our relationship with Africa is unique and does not need any point of reference.
Our partnership is a two way street.
Africa’s development in recent years, a result of African vision and leadership, has been impressive.
The roadmap for the future will reflect our shared vision and goals, and our respective strengths and capabilities.
These could include areas such as human resource development, institution building, infrastructure, clean energy, agriculture, health, education and skill development.
We will also work together on addressing common issues like climate change and sustainable development of blue economy.
India’s development partnership is centred on human resource development and establishment of institutions in Africa, which are, in turn, creating skills and capacities in Africa, including in areas like agriculture, food processing, textiles and small industries to expand exports to India and other countries.
We will certainly raise our partnership to a much higher level in the years ahead.
We will also make our partnership more effective, based on a comprehensive review of our Development Partnership programme with Africa, particularly in terms of capacity building, infrastructure support and technology sharing, in discussion with our African partners.
We have complementary resources and markets; and, the power of our human capital.
We also have a shared global vision.
As we move forward, individually and together, to build a better future for our people and societies, we must also reckon with the impediments to development.
Foremost among them is the scourge of terrorism, regionally and globally.
The spreading tide of extremism and terrorism is a threat we both face.
We in India face it from across our borders.
Terrorist actions cannot be justified on any grounds.
These issues cannot be resolved by a handful of powerful countries or even through regional efforts.
They include issues such as Climate Change but also global public health challenges, drug-trafficking, trafficking of humans, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and international terrorism.
There are newer domains of cyber security and space security.
We welcome the adoption of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and are committed to effective implementation of the Agreement based on equity and principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities.
India had launched a major initiative of International Solar Alliance to bring together on single platform countries of the world blessed with abundant solar power.
We are thankful to Republic of Mali for joining the International Solar Alliance.
Active participation of large and populous countries like India and those in Africa, becomes indispensable in resolving such global issues.
That is why India advocates reforms in global political, economic and security institutions.
They must become more democratic, inclusive and representative of our world.
Unfortunately, few institutions have that character today.
As two countries that have demonstrated our commitment to democratic values, India and Mali share unique bonds of trust and mutual understanding.
We have been a strong votary for restoration of constitutional order in the Republic of Mali and preservation of its territorial integrity.
We are happy that democracy has been restored and the democratic institutions are being strengthened.
We welcome the signing of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation, and hope that it will lead to unity, preservation of territorial integrity, lasting peace, development and prosperity.
My Government appreciates the wisdom of Malian leadership that facilitated the signing of the Agreement.
In India, we believe that political issues should be resolved through ‘Ballot’ and not ‘Bullet’.
We encourage all stakeholders to eschew violence and to embrace peaceful and democratic means to resolve political issues.
I would like to reassure this august house that my Government firmly supports the unity and territorial integrity of the Republic of Mali and is committed to supporting Mali in its reconstruction and developmental efforts under democratic governance.
We see ourselves as a partner in Mali’s reconstruction, economic development and growth.
Government of India has extended 7 Lines of Credit, worth US$ 353 million to Mali.
A large project of US$ 150 million for power transmission, connecting Bamako and Sikasso via Bougouni, is being finalized.
We are ready to deepen our development partnership with Mali and will continue to extend all possible assistance in human resource development and capacity building to Mali.
Our economic and trade relations are expanding, with bilateral trade having trebled in the last five years.
However, trade and investment levels are still below the immense potential that exists.
We are confident that continued stability and peace would encourage Indian companies to look at Mali as an attractive investment destination for the mutual benefit of peoples of our two countries.
We are thankful to Mali for its support to India’s proposal for commemoration of an International Day of Yoga in the United Nations.
We thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Mali for his support to the Yoga day events here.
We look forward to enhancing our cooperation and exchange in the culture and educational sector with Mali.
We were deeply pained when some extremist elements tried to desecrate and destroy the cultural treasures in the famed and historic city of Timbuktu.
We on our part are keen to enhance parliamentary cooperation between our two countries.
Long live Mali-India friendship.
It is a happy co-incidence that both the authors, both former Ambassadors to Myanmar are present on the dais here today.
India and Myanmar share historical and cultural linkages, as well as a colonial past.
With a 1600 kilometer land border and a larger maritime boundary, India and Myanmar have convergent security interests.
The Treaty of Friendship, signed in 1951, provides a strong framework for bilateral cooperation and there have been regular exchanges between the two countries on security issues.
The economic and commercial relations between the two countries are also of increasing significance.
Myanmar is blessed with mineral and hydro-carbon deposits and it can be source of energy and other minerals for India.
But this is not a one way street.
India can also be a source for technology, industrial expertise, infrastructure and investments.
Myanmar is also important for India’s connectivity with the rest of the South-East Asia- an essential requirement for the fructification of our ‘Act-East Policy’.
The enhanced connectivity between India’s North-East with Myanmar can usher in a new era of economic prosperity in the region.
Ambassador Malik’s book traces the various phases of our evolving relations with Myanmar, in the context of the political developments both within Myanmar and in India.
The recent events on India-Myanmar border have underlined the importance of having closer ties with Myanmar.
It has also seen an increase in public interest in Myanmar.
The conduct of successful elections and their outcome creates another opportunity for India to increase its engagement with Myanmar for mutual benefit.
This book is timely and will, no doubt, add to our better understanding of the political, social and economic developments in Myanmar in order to better engage it.
It also emphasizes the value of solid, issue based diplomacy over the kneejerk - media fodder approach to international relations.
Ambassador Preet Malik is eminently equipped to write about Myanmar and India-Myanmar relations.
An erudite diplomat, he has served as our Ambassador/High Commissioner to Cuba, Bahrain, Tanzania and Myanmar.
I wish the Author and the publisher all the very best for the future.
Jai Hind.
I consider it a good sign that its focus is on the world of learning.
The opportunity to meet the youth of the state, who symbolise the Kashmir of tomorrow, is precious and invaluable.
Graduation is an important aspect of academic life, for the institution and for the students.
The training of the mind, however, helps them understand this better and respond appropriately.
This is all the more important in a specialised, technical, institution devoted to the most important area of activity, namely, agriculture.
The facts speak for themselves: This situation is compounded by literacy levels lower than the national average.
In terms of the human development indices, J & K is nearer the bottom than the top.
The scars of the recent past are all too evident.
In such a context every graduate of this institution can make a value addition to the socio-economic development of the state, and to the overall well being of the people of Jammu & Kashmir.
The potential of this is enormous.
This potential can be harnessed for public good by sound public policy.
It is agriculture that has the potential not only to revitalise the economy of the state, but also bring about greater social inclusion and sustainable rehabilitation even while preserving the unique cultural and religious heritage of the state.
My emphasis on the role of the agriculture sector has wider relevance.
For the country as a whole, the current share of agriculture in GDP is around 18.5%, that of services is 55% and of industry around 26%.
The growth rate in the agriculture sector has been a mere 2.7% in the last financial year.
Yet, more than half of the population directly depends on this sector.
The adverse impact of the low growth in agriculture has implications for "the inclusiveness of growth".
There is therefore a need to refocus our efforts on the agricultural sector not just in Jammu & Kashmir, but also in the rest of the country.
I would even venture to say that the Government of India’s proposed push to agriculture through a Second Green Revolution could start from Jammu & Kashmir on a pilot basis.
Ladies and gentlemen The low levels of employment opportunities in J&K have been a matter of concern to the public.
The need of the hour is to think innovatively and the University has a role to play in this fascinating venture.
I refer to the extension education in the field of agriculture.
The Extension Education Programme of the University has conducted training programmes for a diverse profile of beneficiaries such as students, extension workers, farmers and homemakers.
Such efforts to inform and demonstrate to the farmers the findings of research on improved practices are essential to improve rural living and to increase agricultural production.
My young friends Globalisation is now a fact of life.
In the past the agricultural sector was static and immune to change.
The new reality today places a special responsibility on agricultural universities to impart training to students on global factors impacting the agricultural sector in the country.
These are climate change, environmentally sustainable development, and multilateral negotiations and agreements on agricultural products and agricultural subsidies.
For the recipients of various degrees and honours, today is a day to celebrate.
I wish them success in their careers and happiness in their lives.
I am confident that they will carry forward the ideals imbibed during their time spent in this University and continue to work for the development of the state and improving the quality of life of common people, especially in the rural areas.
I notice that since its inception, your Association has structured its work on the specific theme of Asia in New Millennium.
Terms like the Near East, Middle East and Far East entered the political vocabulary and Orientalism became an intellectual industry.
The focus on Asia has helped APISA explore specific areas of the Asian experience.
The 1st Congress dwelt on development, democracy and security.
The 2nd Congress focused on aspects of governance.
The theme of this 3rd Congress is Asian concepts of justice.
I am, I confess, enthused by the theme and intrigued by it.
The concept of justice is integral to social well being; for this reason, it must be reiterated on every possible opportunity.
It is also in the category of universal values, rather than location-specific.
Talk of an Asian concept may, therefore, convey an impression that there is something specific by way of a value addition or value subtraction.
This, presumably, is not intended.
The primacy of Asia in terms of religious or ethical traditions is a matter of recorded history.
Virtually all the world religions - Hinduism, Judaism, Zoroastrianism, Confucianism, Buddhism, Christianity, Shinto, Jainism, Islam and Sikhism - emanated in Asian lands.
Each has an ethical system and thus an approach to the concept of justice.
The human being is a social animal.
Living in society necessitates social arrangements that determine the division of responsibilities and ascribe rights and duties.
Such an allocation is made on a basis that is broadly acceptable; this is considered the principle of social justice.
The critical question for Aristotle, and for every society in history, was the determination of what is considered just – its median and its extremities.
The quest for the nature of justice, however, was much older.
The Indic world considered justice as synonymous with righteousness.
In Mahabharata the sage Vamadeva stresses the need to act righteously: “There is nothing superior to righteousness.
The Muslim approach, for instance, was no different.
It is the counterweight to arrogance.
Justice, said a medieval jurist, is the maintenance of the mean or of the just middle.
It proclaimed “a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations”, asserted equality before the law and equal protection of the law.
These were amplified in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and other international documents.
Any analysis of contemporary Asia, devoid of its modern history, would be partial and inadequate.
The year 1498 marked the coming of the Portuguese.
An Asian awareness of that seminal event was slow in coming.
Other conquerors followed and had different patterns of influence.
All had a profound impact on the inner structures of Asian societies and upset the equilibrium of pre-modern institutions.
The most visible evidence of this was in India.
In a book published in 1951 Sir Earnest Barker reproduced on its first page the Preamble of the Constitution of India and explained his reasons for doing so.
It is reflective of the sovereign will of a people to acquire for themselves the virtues in totality of justice, liberty, equality and fraternity.
The operative line, for our argument today, is the commitment to secure to all its citizens Justice, social, economic and political.
This expression has been the subject of commentary and judicial interpretations.
On this basis, therefore, social justice is a fundamental right.
It can be said, with some justice, that six decades of independent India have been a journey to actualise the concept of social justice visualised in the Constitution.
In the process, content has been added and the concept amplified.
The debate is premised on contemporary, secular, norms of inclusive justice and does not seek sustenance from traditional concepts rooted in religion or tradition.
While much has been done, the task as yet remains unfinished.
But what about the issue of Transnational Justice – the third theme of this Congress.
Because of associations rooted in history and culture, reinforced by the shared experience of colonial domination, the thought of an Asian dimension to the nationalist awareness of emerging India was not a strange one.
An expression of it was the Asian Relations Conference of March-April 1947.
A sense of Asian-ness emerged in India and, possibly, in other Asian lands.
In 1997, the golden jubilee of that historic gathering was celebrated by convening another conference.
There are many in this audience who are in a position to answer these questions in generic and specific terms.
There is one other aspect of the matter.
In Asia, there is a justifiable frustration about selective application of the existing modes of transnational justice.
The provisions for robust international intervention in conflict situations in Asia are unevenly applied.
There can be no apartheid in the application of justice.
The matter goes beyond the realm of political theory.
For several centuries, the history of the world was also the history of the suppression and domination of Asian lands.
Economics is one aspect of the matter: Asia’s share of global trade climbed from 16 percent in 1980 to 27 percent in 2003 and economists predict that Asia would provide the growth engine to world trade.
Whichever we look at it, selective good and selective justice is a recipe for trouble.
A conceptual framework for justice, therefore, has practical implications and can only be viable if it is inclusive – at the societal, national and international levels.
Asian societies, drawing upon their extensive heritage, undoubtedly would come to this conclusion and conceptualise it appropriately.
I wish the Congress success in its endeavours.
Centrality has been the curse of West Asia.
In May 1917, Britain and France used the Sykes-Picot Agreement to acquire ‘the right of priority in enterprises and local loans’ in designated Arab areas of the Ottoman Empire and to deny any facilities to a third Power in the Arabian Peninsula and the Red Sea.
In a parallel move, the secret Balfour Declaration of November 1917 carried the commitment for the ‘establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people’.
A decade earlier on August 31, 1907, the Anglo-Russian Entente was signed, dividing Iran into three zones only one of which was under Iranian control.
‘The Iranians’, in Professor Nikkie Keddie’s words, ‘were neither consulted on the agreement nor informed of the terms’.
That exercise, of division and occupation, was repeated during World War II.
These experiences with external powers left indelible marks on national perceptions.
Furthermore, security perceptions vary greatly within nations and between them.
National security and regime security are not necessarily synonymous.
Today we live in the age of human security.
The answer to the first question is obvious.
West Asia has been and continues to be a pivotal factor in global geopolitics.
These have been aggravated in recent years by a set of new considerations:  These factors do not function autonomously; instead, they interact on a continuous basis.
Comprehensive analysis of these is not possible in the short time available to me this morning.
In specific terms, this would refer to the role of Israel and Iran, and occasionally of Turkey, and the impact of their relationship on the core problems of contemporary West Asia.
An answer to the third question is contingent on variables of considerable size and diversity.
One could begin by stating the factual situation as known publicly.
Two are on the periphery – Israel and Iran, and one beyond it – the United States.
The interaction of these with the region, and with each other, is having a decisive impact.
A beginning may be made with self-perceptions.
As Undersecretary of State Nicholas Burns put it, it is the epicentre of American foreign policy.
‘Rule lightly, unless provoked.
Delegate power and don’t tamper with local customs.
Using these rules, great empires dominated the Middle East for centuries.
Our problem, though, is that we don’t see ourselves as a great empire, and we don’t want to rule anyone directly.
We just want to transform them thoroughly’.
The operative expression in both sets of perceptions is a desire to dominate.
The discussion is only about modalities.
Israel, a mid-twentieth century factor in the region, has not been able to translate its military superiority into a total, definitive, victory.
Its invincibility was dented in the war with Hezbollah.
This is not reflected in political perceptions where right wing political parties and a small but effective settler lobby has defied moves towards a meaningful peace process.
The lack of a serious U.S. interest in the peace process has helped sustain it.
III The state-centric security concerns in West Asia thus relate principally to the moves on the chess board of the United States, Israel and Iran in relation both to each other and to other actors in the region.
The United States today is not the Sole Super Power of the spring of 2003.
The policies of unilateralism, ‘creative destruction’ and pre-emption have faltered.
The financial burden of the war and the drain on the dollar has added to public concerns.
The dissent in the national security establishment of the United States has become public.
Suggestions about military action have emanated from time to time; doubts about its efficacy and wider implications have also been raised.
The absence of decisive evidence of Iranian culpability has been a restraining factor.
Dr. Henry Kissinger, who was in Delhi recently, was cautiously optimistic about such talks taking place in 2008.
Israeli perceptions of Iran are nuanced.
The channels of communications have never completely closed.
Iran’s support to the Palestinians and the Hezbollah has been a strategic irritant to Israel.
An Iranian success in developing a nuclear weapon capability would deny Israel the regional monopoly it has in the matter.
Israel has been extremely active in mobilising American opinion against Iran.
On the other hand, Haaretz magazine cited on October 25, 2007 a remark by foreign minister Tzipi Livni that ‘Iranian nuclear weapons do not pose an existential threat to Israel’.
Similarly nuanced are the Iranian positions on the U.S. and Israel.
Iran in 2002 had also signalled its willingness to accept a ‘Malaysian profile’ in return for an easing of Israeli and American efforts to isolate Iran.
IV So much for the periphery and the extra-regional actors.
Islamism readily provided a substitute.
Its inherent anti-communism was looked upon with favour by the concerned Western powers.
The point was proved at the time of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
The slogan of Jihad in terms of armed resistance was promoted by the states of the region (with some exceptions) and actively endorsed by the western powers.
A simplistic analysis of these is rarely rewarding.
Domestic, regional, external and ideological factors combine to produce chemical reactions of varying intensity.
Rapid inflow of wealth, on the other hand, brings in its wake social disruptions and awakened expectations.
Social systems also produce their anti-bodies.
The youth who spent time in Afghanistan returned home Islamised and radicalised.
They sought correctives from local rulers and their external friends.
They found solace in traditional, religious, idiom.
Iraq added its share in ample measure.
Islamism is an ideology of protest, and of change.
Suppression without other correctives, however, gives it a lease of life.
V  It is time to wind up.
Diagnosis and commentary on the first and the second questions inevitably propel us towards the third.
The question is of the will to undertake it.
Entrepreneurship and wealth creation are indeed ancient themes in Indian history.
Yet, entrepreneurship is also a very recent theme.
A young India today sees opportunity all around.
For perspective, this amount is roughly over a third of our GDP at current prices!
Entrepreneurship development and wealth creation are no exception.
In India, existing facts substantiate that social capital plays a crucial role in human capital formation, economic performance of firms and superior performance of some social groups and geographic regions.
Over time, this has been the basis in India for the emergence of business communities and large business familial networks.
It has also promoted particular business and investment cultures that have been successful in Indian and other cultures.
The flip side to this story is self-evident.
In the West, one has heard of the tremendous incubation and entrepreneuring impact of affiliations to premier Indian technical and management institutes such as IITs and IIMs.
Indian business and industry must ponder on this if the current economic dynamism and entrepreneurial enthusiasm is to remain sustainable.
II Secondly, entrepreneurship in India is associated with the manufacturing industry and services.
The potential for entrepreneurship and innovation in agriculture is enormous and it has a multiplier payback effect on the society.
Sustainable and inclusive growth and enduring employment generation demand new initiatives in the agriculture sector.
The government has emphasised the need for another big push to agriculture through a ‘Second Green Revolution’.
I look forward to the day when one of the ‘Entrepreneur of the Year’ awards would be dedicated to agriculture.
III Thirdly, the vital causation between governance and entrepreneurship is often overlooked.
Besides individual drive and motivation, the enabling environment to promote entrepreneurship and aid wealth creation is a direct result of good governance.
Ladies and Gentlemen  As a generation, the India of today looks at the future with immense optimism – in fact, the whole nation seems to be imbued with an entrepreneurial zeal.
The motto seems to be – if they can, so can we!
May this infectious enthusiasm prevail at all levels.
I once again congratulate the winners of the awards today who deserve our appreciation for their commitment and relentless pursuit.
I thank the organisers for inviting me to this function.
Over the years the IDSA has carved out for itself a place in the fraternity of the regional and international community dedicating itself to matters strategic.
These engagements have in some measure helped shape perceptions, and add a much needed Indian dimension to them.
To think about the world of today in terms of security and foreign policy, therefore, requires cognition of what is decidedly new.
Ladies and gentlemen Any exercise in structured thinking is premised on conceptual clarity.
Our terms of reference today pertain both to security policy and to foreign policy.
In the first place, the two are not synonymous since national security has domestic dimensions as relevant as external ones.
The concept of security itself has acquired depth and a new meaning; it now encapsulates non-traditional security and is focused on comprehensive human security.
In doing so, it would still go back to the basic objectives enunciated by Jawaharlal Nehru in his Address on 7th September 1946, six days after the Interim National Government was formed.
The focus thus remains on success, on freedom and on the well-being of our people and on a cooperative, non-hegemonic, world order.
By implication, challenges to these in a changing situation become challenges to our security.
Undertaking this quantum definitional leap is critical if the discourse on national security and on foreign policy challenges is to evolve and progress.
The sources of strength, and weaknesses, of this reality need to be borne in mind by scholars devoting themselves to national security studies.
Ladies and Gentlemen  We live in an era where the only certainty is uncertainty.
All around us are societies where the priorities were reversed, with dire consequences.
There is, however, hope that eventually sanity will prevail.
Almost two decades after India proposed it in 1988, there is now talk in the United States itself of a phased reduction and elimination of nuclear weapons.
Would some researcher in IDSA be tempted to explore the options from an Indian perspective?
Ladies and Gentlemen The only approach to our security and foreign policy challenges is one of incremental success.
This is a painstaking task that requires patience and clarity of purpose.
I wish the Institute all success in its work.
Thank you.
The Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development of 2002 constitutes the landmark document reaffirming the commitment of world leaders to sustainable development.
I wish to dwell on this subject in some detail today.
The global inequalities between the developed and the developing countries increasingly find reflection in disparities within developing countries.
In our country, national averages of economic growth and human development are rendered meaningless as they obscure such deep inequalities.
At the most basic level, it is the inequalities in accessing basic health and education that perpetuate this vicious cycle.
Ladies and Gentlemen I now come to the third pillar of sustainable development – environmental protection.
Climate change has emerged as the headline of environmental protection efforts.
India, with 17% of the world population has only 4% of global GHG emissions.
In a significant development, we have succeeded in effectively de-linking energy sector growth from economic growth.
While our GDP growth rate exceeds 9%, our current primary energy consumption growth rate is merely 3.7% per year.
This stand of India has been acknowledged by some countries in the G8 as part of their position on climate change issues.
We have always emphasised the principle of common but differentiated responsibility and respective capability.
We need to adopt the same position at the national level that we seek at the multilateral level.
We need to generate state-wise data on per capita emissions.
Urban areas and heavily industrialised states that significantly contribute to Greenhouse Gas emissions must have different financial and other responsibilities on climate change as compared to rural areas and economically less developed states.
The global structure of dealing with climate change should eventually develop local and state-level strata.
If the cause of climate change is the production and consumption patterns, any study of these patterns can’t be limited to nation-states.
In the final analysis, sustainable development is an issue of peoples.
I wish the Conference all success and hope that the policy document emanating from it would benefit governments and all stakeholders.
Thank you.
This is one aspect of the matter.
Zakir saheb conceded that this objective was somewhat opaque in the minds of the Jamia fraternity.
Some others at Jamia spoke in the same vein.
Abid Hussain urged the need to create an alumnus who is 'insan-e-kamil, sachcha Musalman aur pacca Hindustani'.
Perhaps there was, in the background, a resonance of Syed Ahmad Khan's concept of amal-i-saleh (good deeds).
Taking the argument further, Mohammad Mujeeb dwelt on the sources of the Indian sense of unity.
The acceptance of this approach to unity will be a spiritual effort and can succeed only if it receives sustenance and power from the traditions of religiousness which are a part of our history.
'The postmodernist age in the 1990s' he wrote in 1992, 'hammers at the doors of the Muslim ijtihad; Muslims ignore the din at their peril.
None of these have been devoid of pain.
As a result, he notes, Muslim communities in the West are 'living through a veritable silent revolution'.
Tradition is made sacrosanct while the rationale of tradition is all but forgotten.
Jadeediyat or modernity has become a tainted expression.
Such a mindset constrains critical thinking necessary both for the affirmation of faith and for the wellbeing of the community.
The instrumentality of adaptation to change - Ijtihad - is frowned upon if not ignored altogether.
Syed Ahmad Khan was acutely aware of the problems in an era of painful change.
If therefore we do  not have living mujtahids, how shall we ask those who are dead  about questions which were not material facts of life in their time.
As a result, and despite the quantification of the extent of social backwardness, community effort to ameliorate it has remained confused and inadequate.
Let us look at the situation in its totality.
Muslims in India today number about 150 million and constitute a significant segment - 13.4 percent - of Indians.
51.9 percent of this population is below the age of twenty and 60.6 percent below the age twenty five.
Muslims have the highest child sex ratio of any social group in the country - 986 girls per 1000 boys.
They are more urbanised than the general population.
On the other hand, the literacy rate among Muslims is 59.1 percent, against a national average of 65.1; it is even lower in the case of female literacy.
40.7 percent of the Muslims are in the OBC category (15.7 percent of the total OBC population of the country) and a small segment in SCs.
The incidence of poverty among urban Muslims is even higher than among the urban SCs/STs, is well above other OBCs, and is almost double of the national average.
These figures speak for themselves in terms of the imperative for correcting social imbalances resulting from social immobility.
Reinvigorate the traditional practice of charity through focused philanthropy, and impart a new dynamism to the management of Awqaf to derive maximum benefit for the community.
The Muslim middle class, however, is weak and hesitant as an agent of social change.
The literacy and development gap in regard to Muslim women adds to this handicap; so do perceptions of physical and economic insecurity.
Their effort would need to focus both on legitimate demands on the State and on the mobilisation of internal resources of the community for the empowerment of the marginalised.
Its achievements in recent years have been noteworthy.
It has shown itself receptive to new ideas and creative practices.
The institution is now a part of the academic landscape of the country.
On the contrary, it is the first step in a grand participatory venture of building a new India.
Thank you.
I am grateful to Minister Aiyar for inviting me to participate in this Convocation.
I am greatly honoured by the Institute’s decision to confer the Degree of Doctor of Letters (Honoris Causa) on me.
The Institute was established in 1957, the centenary year of the first war of independence, and located at Gwalior, where Rani Lakshmibai had laid her life for the cause of freedom.
This year marks the 150th anniversary of 1857, and I feel privileged to be here in Gwalior today.
Ladies and Gentlemen The importance of physical education in the rise and fall of nations is an underestimated fact of history.
Indeed, ancient civilisations that could harness and impart physical education training on a systemic and institutional scale among their population could survive and thrive.
The grammar and idiom of physical education has changed over the centuries – its essential role in human resource development, promotion of good health, recreation and social bonding remains unchanged.
In India, the archaeological excavations of Mohenjodaro and Harappa, references in Vedic literature, Ramayana and Mahabharata and ancient Indian literary works attest the vital role of sports and games in our social and cultural life.
But indicators of national health are not very encouraging.
The Third National Family Health Survey reveals that around 80% of children in the age group of 6-35 months are anaemic.
Over 50% of married women and around 25% of married men are anaemic.
Around 20% of children under three years of age suffer from acute under-nutrition or wasting.
Public expenditure on health is around 1.2% of GDP and is low by any standards.
In the Constitution of India, in the Seventh Schedule, ‘sports’ comes under the State List clubbed with “theatres and dramatic performances, cinemas, entertainments and amusements”.
Under the Constitution, broad basing and increasing the popularity of sports and games is primarily the responsibility of States.
In actual practice, allocation of resources to sports by state governments has been minimal.
The question of inclusion of “Sports” in the Concurrent List needs to be pursued for effective involvement of all stakeholders in the development and promotion of sports in the country.
The link between policies on sports and physical education, human resource development and youth affairs in the country was also weak for a long period.
Until 1982, sports was seen as a secondary activity under the HRD Ministry.
It was after India hosted the IX Asian Games that a new Department of Sports was created under the HRD Ministry.
This was expanded to a Department of Youth Affairs and Sports in 1985 and became a Ministry only as late as May 2000.
Polices on physical education, sports and youth affairs were synchronised through the National Sports Policy 2001, National Youth Policy 2003 and the National Policy on Education 1992.
It is increasingly accepted that the opportunity to develop and preserve physical powers and capabilities is an essential condition for the effective exercise of fundamental human rights.
An analysis of the number of Olympic medals per million population done for the past three Olympics puts India as the last country of the list.
The same is the result when the Olympic medal tally is standardised by GDP.
This youth of the country are our most precious asset, and it is upto the nation how best their energy and enthusiasm is harnessed for the development and progress of our nation.
To the young students here, I wish to say that they should not be deterred by the systemic and institutional constraints that afflict our sports and games.
Your presence, knowledge and skills are urgently required in educational and sports institutes across the length and breadth of our country.
You will symbolise the unity and diversity of India.
I once again thank Minister Aiyar and the Institute for inviting me.
Thank you.
It is a privilege to interact with the students of this prestigious University.
I bring to you the greetings of the people of India.
India, the largest democracy in the world rejoices at the gains made by Nigerian democracy, the largest democracy in Africa, in the past 18 years.
Our shared struggle against the colonial rule provides the foundations of India-Africa partnership.
For this reason, a closer look at how perceptions developed is of relevance.
Independent India is a faithful reflection of the legacy of our national movement.
Much of the gain from the movement is enshrined in our Constitution and continues to enlighten the political and judicial discourse in India.
Our people have tended to use this legacy as the yardstick to judge the performance of governments, political parties and institutions.
Thus our national movement was more than a struggle for independence.
It was an exercise in building a nation.
The Indian national movement provides one of the few instances of a colonial, exploitive and tyrannical political system being successfully and peacefully replaced and transformed.
The Indian national movement is also an example of how the constitutional space offered by the existing structure could be used without getting co-opted by it.
It did not completely reject this space- but entered and used it effectively in combination with political mobilization to overthrow the existing structure.
It succeeded in politicizing, and drawing into political action, a large part of the Indian people.
Although the success or failure of a movement does indeed, depend on the quality of its leadership.
India was blessed that a set of people of incredible talent and wisdom graced the period marking our struggle.
Mahatma Gandhi, in employing satyagraha- the non-violent insistence for truth and justice- also gave a political tool to the masses seeking to oppose a tyrannical rule.
Satyagraha, as a form of struggle, was based on the active participation of the people and on the sympathy and support of the non-participating millions.
The movement popularized democratic ideas and institutions among the people and struggled for the introduction of parliamentary institutions on the basis of popular elections.
From the very beginning, our leaders fought against attacks by the state on the freedoms of the press, expression and association, and made the struggle for these freedoms an integral part of the national movement.
Our national movement was fully committed to a polity based on representative democracy and the full range of civil liberties for the individual.
It provided the experience through which these two could become an integral part of Indian political thinking.
Discussion, debate and persuasion, backed by public opinion, were emphasized for bringing about political and social change.
The ideology of violence was eschewed.
The national movement was also a struggle for economic development.
In time an economic ideology developed which was to dominate the views of independent India.
The national movement accepted ,with near unanimity, the need to develop India on the basis of industrialization which in turn was to be independent of foreign capital and was to rely on the indigenous capital goods sector.
The movement also increasingly moved towards a programme of agrarian reform.
From its foundation in1885, the Indian National Congress- the main political organ of the national movement- was organized on democratic lines.
It relied upon discussion at all levels as the chief mode for the formation of its policies and arriving at political discussions.
Its policies and resolutions were publicly discussed and debated and then voted upon.
An aspect of its commitment to the creation of an egalitarian society was the national movement’s opposition to all forms of inequality, discrimination and oppression based on gender and caste.
It allied itself with and often subsumed movements and organizations for the social liberation of women and the lower castes.
The national movement brought millions of women out of their homes into the political arena.
Its reform agenda included the improvement of their social position including the right to work and education and to equal political rights.
As part of its struggle against caste inequality and caste oppression, abolition of untouchability became one of its major political priorities after 1920.
From its early days, the national movement was committed to secularism.
Yet the dark forces of communalism were powerful and led to the partition of India in 1947.
That traumatic event resulted in a wave of communal carnage.
Despite it, the strong secular commitment of the national movement enabled independent India to make secularism a basic pillar of its Constitution, as also of its state and society.
Our National Movement was not chauvinistic or jingoistic, and looked beyond the shores of India as many of its leaders developed a broad international outlook based on opposition to colonialism and sympathy and support for people fighting for their independence.
Gandhi’s political strategy inspired many.
In West Africa, nationalist leaders such as Kwame Nkrumah in the British colony of the Gold Coast were inspired by Gandhi’s success.
In Poland, Lech Walessa consciously tried to incorporate elements of Gandhian strategy in the Solidarity Movement.
They were not angels in heaven; they were human like the rest of us, in India and Nigeria.
This was a long process whose roots can be drawn from the ancient era.
But, it was only in the 19th century that the concept of a national identity and national consciousness, in its modern sense, emerged.
This growth was intimately connected to the national movement.
The social, economic and political factors had inspired the people to define and achieve their national identity.
People began discovering their unity in the process of their struggle against colonial rule.
For our leaders, the notion of a structured nation did not contradict its unity.
They not only acknowledged but also appreciated India’s rich cultural, linguistic, religious, ethnic and regional diversity.
The emergence of a strong national identity and the flowering of other narrower identities were seen as mutually reinforcing processes.
If free India could start and persist with a democratic polity, it was because the national movement had already firmly established the civil libertarian and democratic tradition among the Indian people4.
It was this tradition which is reflected in the Indian Constitution.
It tends to erode and become irrelevant unless reinforced and developed and at times transcended in a creative manner to suit changing circumstances.
Our youth- with 60% Nigerians under the age of 25 years and more than two-thirds of India's 1.2 billion population under the age of 35 years- are our strength.
We have a great opportunity to work together to channelize this demographic dividend.
National experiences can have relevance beyond borders in a fast shrinking world.
I wish you a bright future and success in your chosen calling in life.
I thank you for giving me this opportunity to share some thoughts with you.
Long live India- Nigeria friendship.
Excellencies Distinguished Guests Ladies and gentlemen I am happy to welcome distinguished Parliamentarians from the United Kingdom, the European Parliament and the United States and to inaugurate this programme organized by the Ministry of External Affairs.
This is an unusual, but by no means an unwelcome, gathering.
It brings together foreigners but not strangers.
It is unique because every person in this distinguished group has an India-connection.
The purpose of this gathering is to inform rather than propagate.
Let me touch upon some aspects of this debate.
Over the next few days you would be briefed in some detail on India’s interests in regional and global issues.
This would depend on our intrinsic strength.
Our achievements in many fields, and successes on the economic front, are substantial.
And yet, as was mentioned recently, ‘there are other realities’ – of dehumanizing poverty, of perpetual struggles for survival, of painful contrasts.
In the final analysis, our success in addressing these challenges would determine our place in the world.
Ladies and Gentlemen Each one of you is a shining example demonstrating that multiculturalism is a viable model for peaceful coexistence in societies that are multiethnic, multi-religious and multilingual.
I am aware that the questions of identity and accommodation have of late come to the fore in many of your countries.
The Indian experience in these matters may be of some relevance.
I commend the Public Diplomacy division of the Ministry of External Affairs for having taken this initiative of inviting Indian origin Parliamentarians for this programme.
I wish your meeting all success.
Thank you.
The confluence of this with the theme of the present Conference – delivering democracy and sustainable development – is evident.
The concepts of freedom, peace, democracy, and sustainable development are not independent variables in the societal calculus; instead, each depends on the others to sustain and energize itself.
Parliamentarians, so visible in this audience, represent the spirit of democracy.
The question of the meaning and content of democracy has been on the national and the global agenda for some time and has generated lively debates.
Structures of governance are one aspect of the matter; delivery is another.
Democratic governance must therefore impact meaningfully on the public in its daily life, in its quest for physical and economic security, on ways and means of ensuring better living standards.
The agenda of this Conference, I understand, dwells on various aspects of sustainable development and environmental protection.
Governments the world over have finally started taking note of climate change and global warming that affect all of us.
Ladies and gentlemen Success of democracy is one of India’s most significant achievements.
It is a great honour for India that a separate regional status has been accorded to it within the CPA.
Distinguished delegates The greatest challenge before all of us today is how to make our parliamentary institutions relevant in this era of globalisation.
The new global world order has to be built on the tenets of equity, harmony, tolerance, diversity and pluralism.
Parliamentary institutions all over the world are under pressure to meet the challenges of sustainable development, inclusive growth and good governance.
The answer lies in seeking to strengthen, and deepen, the norms of participation and of accountability.
It is our collective responsibility to ensure that nobody is left behind in this era of globalisation.
I wish you every success in your deliberations.
Thank you.
I am happy to be here today amongst friends from the Commonwealth family.
On a conceptual plane, it would be difficult to argue that size and beauty necessarily stand in inverse proportion to each other.
Humankind has, nevertheless, traditionally bestowed certain virtues on smallness.
The Commonwealth Parliamentary Association was the first international organisation to focus on the specific concerns of small states.
This is indicative of far sightedness.
I hope the deliberations at this conference will address these issues.
In the context of a country's size, 'small' is a comparative rather than an absolute concept.
Each country has its own set of concerns and vulnerabilities arising from the interplay of economic, environmental and social factors.
This is more pronounced in the context of small countries as they have limited resources and limited capacity to withstand and manage adversity and crises.
Ladies and Gentlemen, The Commonwealth has good reasons for its interest in small states.
The overwhelming majority of the members of the Commonwealth are developing countries; 49 of the 53 members to be precise.
Around 60% of the membership of the Commonwealth represents small states.
Thus, your concerns and problems, while being unique to the small and developing states, represent the concerns of the majority of the members of the Commonwealth.
Distinctiveness, nevertheless, is partial.
Many of the troubling problems confronting the nations of the world today are neutral to geography and size.
It is of paramount importance that small states have full say as equal members in addressing such pressing issues that vitally impact on them.
The global agenda, mercifully, is not all preventive and has many positive dimensions.
These relate to sustainable development which, in the context of small countries, necessarily involves multi-pronged strategies that include international assistance in terms of human and material resources.
Such strategies must focus on economic resilience that calls for capacity building, economic diversification and diversifying the trade basket to reduce dependence on imported goods and increase the range of goods and services exports.
The Commonwealth, with its huge membership, has within its fold resources that ought to be harnessed to cater to such requirements.
India, I am happy to say, has always responded positively to these.
The Commonwealth Fund for Technical Co-operation (CFTC), to which India is one of the largest contributors, provides developmental assistance in the form of workshops and technical advisors for short and long term assignments.
It helps in capacity building of member states by providing relevant technical advice through the provision of manuals, model legislation and codes of best practices.
Another technical assistance programme that provides a wide range of services to small and developing countries is the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) Programme.
Under this, India provides training of nationals of developing countries in premier Indian institutions and facilitates short-term study visits to India for their senior officers and decision makers.
ITEC is response oriented and builds on our skills of manpower and technology that are more appropriate to the geographical and ecological conditions and the stage of technological development of several developing countries.
Through the ITEC Programme, India has been responding to the needs of capacity building and assisting small and developing countries to establish useful infrastructural facilities with technological means and skills appropriate to their resources and needs.
Many Indian experts have also been deputed abroad in these small states in fields like Marine Engineering, Agriculture, Geology, Fisheries and Medicine.
Ladies and Gentlemen,   As Parliamentarians of small countries, you have a special responsibility to equip yourselves with the knowledge base and skill sets relevant to your concerns.
There should be efforts to achieve economic resilience that should be the core element of sustainable development strategies for small states.
There is no alternative to an unrelenting focus on good governance and sound economic practices.
Distinguished delegates,  The era of globalization helps us overcome the constraints of geography and history.
Small developing states can benefit immensely from the introduction and use of information and communication technologies.
They are the great leveler in the knowledge societies of today.
We pledged the single largest contribution to this “Commonwealth Connects” programme and the first International E-Partnership Summit under this programme was held in New Delhi in March this year.
Separately, India has launched ambitious pilot projects of tele-education and tele-medicine on an Africa-wide basis earlier this year.
This is a positive example of South-South cooperation that uses information and space technologies and generates a multiplier developmental effect.
The enhanced rural connectivity, I am sure, will provide an effective way of harnessing technology to provide democratic access and empowerment.
Thank you.
It was at the 9th Session of the Indian National Congress at Lahore in 1893, that Dadabhai Naoroji commented, and I quote: “The greatest question before you, the question of all questions, is the poverty of India.
This will be, I am much afraid, the great future trouble both of the Indian people and of the British rulers.
The macro-economic figures of the Indian economy appear good.
This poor and vulnerable segment of the Indian population represents the broad category within which the dynamics of poverty alleviation plays out.
The poor are not homogenous.
Indeed, this is poverty alleviation, but in a technical sense.
While all citizens contribute to the national effort, in public perception, there are two Indias - an India focused on wealth accumulation and another India focused on poverty reduction.
Thus overall economic growth of the country has not yet translated itself into fair distribution of the fruits of development.
The challenge is to accept that wealth accumulation and poverty reduction are two sides of the same coin and need to be addressed together.
The debate so far has been mainly concentrated on income poverty and inequality.
It is held that economic development leads to poverty reduction and eventually to human development.
While the broad causality of this is true, the extent of impact is dependent on the income distribution pattern of a country.
If as in India, the richest segment of the population captures a larger share of the economic development, the extent of poverty reduction would be lower for the same quantum of economic development.
These are not esoteric philosophical or economic issues.
They are vital political themes that find a strong resonance in the basic principles of our polity.
Article 37 of the Constitution defines the application of the Directive Principles of State Policy as “fundamental in the governance of the country”.
This could be one parameter for assessing the “State of States”.
Inclusive growth could thus be the subtext of all of our developmental efforts.
I thank the organisers of the Conclave for inviting me, and wish it all success.
Thank you.
It is a credible manifestation of civil society interaction between two countries.
I subscribe to the view that conceptual clarity and definitional precision help the process of analysis.
For long, much too long, the paradigm of security and politics has been state-centric.
Experience, however, demonstrated the limitations of this approach.
More than a decade earlier, the UNDP’s Human Development Report for 1994 shed useful light on the concept of human security and predicted that the idea would revolutionize society in the 21st century.
It identified freedom from fear and freedom from want as two interdependent principal components of human security; both concepts are people-centered.
In 2003 the Commission on Human Security, co-chaired by Prof. Amartya Sen and Mrs. Sadako Ogata was instrumental, through its Report, in placing the issue on the international agenda.
The upside benefits of the latter are global growth and development that transcends national borders.
This is the argument for globalisation and for open markets and economic policies.
By the same lethal logic, however, the downside risks to human security also are not bound by national boundaries.
This is unique to our age; previous generations did not have to deal with the global impact of local issues or the local impact of global issues.
In such a context, interaction between countries and societies needs to move away from the traditional confines and accommodate these wider concerns.
The Indo-Bangladesh Dialogue, I hope, has included this dimension to relations between India and Bangladesh, to help demonstrate its relevance to the public in both countries.
The imperative is clear and emanates from a specific question.
Some indications of this are available in SAARC documents.
Despite these, and other official proclamations, and considerable civil society pressure and persuasion, the honest truth is that institutional structures and systemic constraints come in the way of their realisation.
Our delivery mechanisms remain a major impediment.
The missing element in these is sufficient political will.
The imperative of survival calls for an alternate approach.
Thank You.
I congratulate the organisers of this Conference for taking this initiative to discuss issues of participatory banking.
Banking, in one form or another, is as old as mankind.
The evolution of banking through history from ancient Babylon, to ancient Greece and ancient Rome indicates that humans developed ‘banks’ dealing with grain and later other goods including cattle, agricultural tools, precious metals and then money.
In our part of the world, the active trading communities of ancient India and Arabia had evolved elaborate financial and trading arrangements along both land and sea trade routes.
These trade routes, especially the Incense Route, the Silk Route and the Spice Route, spawned multiple cultural, religious and economic inter-civilisational influences.
Modern banking systems, in India and elsewhere, trace their basic format to the development of economic and financial structures to support the spurt in the trade of agricultural commodities and manufactured goods in medieval Europe.
Yet, the picture of human development across the globe is patchy, highly stratified and characterised by inequality and a widening gulf in wealth and opportunity.
Some are based on ethical principles and others cater to the lowest strata of the pyramid.
The case of the Grameen Bank comes to mind, with its motto of “Banking for the Poor”.
Participatory Banking is one such system that addresses the banking and financial needs of diverse communities in many countries.
The principles of participatory banking and finance have been mainstreamed at the institutional level, where the clients are large industries or infrastructure projects.
At the retail level, however, participatory banking faces real challenges.
Participatory banking, like commercial mainstream banking or for that matter any service industry, has to address the financial and banking needs of common people.
That is the only touchstone of its success.
In the past, our banking sector was focused on institutional clients.
That has changed today.
I hope this Conference will address ways and means for participatory banking to focus on retail banking, which, in countries like India, would continue to remain the engine of growth in the banking sector.
Today we live in an era of options – indeed, multiple options.
Peoples and countries desire options for their progress and growth, for opportunities and for access to services and goods, so as to lead a better quality of life with dignity.
Gaps in human development that we witness today reflect unequal access and opportunity.
This must be bridged for there to be peace, security and progress for all.
Innovative approaches such as Participatory banking and finance should help in plugging such gaps.
I hope this Conference would debate and address this theme.
I wish the Conference success in its work.
I have great pleasure in welcoming Prime Minister Shinzo Abe to address the Members of Parliament in this historic Central Hall, on behalf of more than one billion people of India and their representatives in Parliament.
Mr. Prime Minister, Japan and India are two great Asian nations who are civilisational neighbours.
Our historical relations were enriched through the common bond of Buddhism and multifarious cultural interaction.
Both our nations have chosen Parliamentary democracy as the key instrument to meet the hopes and aspirations of our peoples.
This has served us well.
Mr. Prime Minister, the visit of your grand father as the Prime Minister of Japan five decades ago was a landmark in our bilateral relations.
Your visit today comes at an important juncture in our national histories and the regional and international situation.
It is commonly said that the 21st century is the Asian century.
Let us build an open, inclusive and prosperous Asia, as a vital and integral component of a peaceful, democratic and equitable world order.
Japan has played an important role in the development of Indian industry and in the building of our infrastructure.
Mr. Prime Minister, we deeply appreciate Japanese assistance provided to us in many areas over the years.
The blue print for our economic cooperation in the future is premised on enhanced trade, technological and scientific cooperation and in realizing the huge potential for Japanese investments in India, especially in the infrastructure sector.
Your visit would give a further impetus to the realization of our economic synergies.
Hon’ble Members, it is in the fitness of things that Prime Minister Abe is here today to share with us his vision for a new partnership between our countries.
I welcome you once again Mr. Prime Minister and may I now invite you to address the Members of our Parliament.
The first anniversary of the launching of the Lok Sabha TV channel is a significant milestone in our democratic and legislative evolution.
Today is the age of the omnipresent media.
Media is the life blood of a democracy and the most effective interface between the Parliament and the people.
The Lok Sabha TV channel has played an important function in the political education of our people about the parliamentary processes, constitutional governance, democratic culture and contemporary social and political issues.
This is an assumption that must be challenged through creative programming on serious issues.
It is heartening that some of our Members of Parliament have anchored on this channel on important issues.
Public dissemination of ideas and public debate are integral to democratic functioning.
The seating of the visitors’ gallery in the Parliament is limited.
Modern technology has enabled us to transmit the deliberations of the Parliament to every home and empower every citizen to be a participant in the political process of governance.
The Lok Sabha TV channel deserves our full support and best wishes in its pioneering effort.
We rejoice over our achievements and successes; we introspect about our limitations and failures.
The reasons for rejoicing are evident.
Sixty years after 1947, India’s progress is evident.
Our achievements in every sector of national activity are noteworthy.
We are a nation of consequence in the comity of nations, respected and sought after.
Equally evident are grounds for introspection.
The content of each is spelt out.
Justice has to be dispensed in social, economic and political terms; liberty has to be of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; equality means equality of status and opportunity.
The hope, nevertheless, remains.
They may agree with the contents of an Urdu couplet: We need to ponder over other matters too.
There was an apprehension in the early years of independence of physical balkanization; it proved to be unfounded.
A more distressing trend, increasingly evident, is the balkanization of the mind.
It needs to be addressed.
The challenge is to promote Indianness in all its diversity.
Our success in establishing and sustaining procedural democracy is acknowledged.
Gandhiji reminded us of some pitfalls.
Democracy, he said, “is a great institution and therefore it is liable to be greatly abused.
Substantive democracy would also need a much greater measure of justice in terms of participation and representation.
The growth in public awareness is to be welcomed; its content, however, needs to be substantive rather than sensational.
Our objective of a plural society, a democratic polity and a secular state structure has to be reaffirmed and reinvigorated.
Each of these is a source of strength; together they demonstrate the uniqueness of our system.
Those who consolidated the gains of freedom through difficult decades contributed their share in full measure.
India of the future, however, principally belongs to the youth.
They would shape it through their vision, aspiration and hard work.
They must not succumb to the temptations of cynicism in regard to civic institutions.
Today, on the 60th anniversary of our Independence, we pay homage to the countless men and women who made sacrifices in the quest for freedom.
Today, we rededicate ourselves to their ideals and pledge ourselves to the building of modern India.
Jai Hind!
The virtue of the democratic process is obvious.
Equally evident is the burden of the twin responsibilities entrusted.
The enormity of the task induces humility.
I am overwhelmed by the warmth of your welcome and the confidence you repose in my stewardship of this office.
I do pledge my utmost effort to discharge my duties with fairness and impartiality and to make every effort to protect and defend the rights and privileges of this Council.
Ours is a parliamentary democracy whose form and objectives are inscribed in the Constitution.
Its institutions have stood the test of time.
We, nevertheless, need to reiterate and reinvigorate our commitment to them and to their operational modalities.
In such a system, the majority to my right and the minority to my left, both play an equal part.
But, at the same time, minorities also have their responsibilities.
These have been amplified by the rulings of the Chair.
The assigned duty of the Chair is to ensure that all play by these rules.
The referee in a game of hockey or football does carry coloured cards in his shirt pocket.
A good game, however, is one in which the need to use these cards does not arise.
Members, even though I am a new comer to this august body, as a citizen I am not unaware of its deliberations.
Much has been done, continues to be done and would be done here to promote the national agenda.
They, after all, constitute the overwhelming majority of our population.
The challenge also is to seek justice through substantive equity and meaningful fraternity.
The will to do so is one aspect of it.
Institutional efficacy and a delivery mechanism is another.
Both are integral to the process of change.
Delays aggravate matters.
Emerging Security Imperatives Rear Admiral Samuel Alade, Commandant, National Defence College Officers of the NDC of Nigeria,  Friends, A layman treads diffidently in a domain inhabited by men and women accustomed to walk on the razor’s edge of acute analysis on matters of critical importance.
Policy making in most countries is often reactive: Governments are driven by deadlines and events.
The raison d’etre of statehood is provision of security for its citizens, and to a lesser extent its residents, in both its internal and external dimensions.
The experience of the last seven decades, and especially since the end of the Cold War, shows that real life veers quite significantly away from text book assumptions.
Many of the States have radiated insecurity towards their citizens and residents and thus destabilised  their own societies and polities.
This has led to state failures and implosions in the internal dimension and to regional and even global crises in the external dimension.
Once we begin to address other threats, two characteristics rapidly emerge.
The latter, in effect, would often depend upon demonstrated good rather than its a priori acceptance.
Another aspect is the nature and diversity of challenges.
These include pandemics and all matters relating to environment and climate change Together they demonstrate the inefficacy of unilateral action and the imperative of a comprehensive and cooperative approach.
People need to feel secure both at the individual and community level.
If they feel they are victims of economic deprivation, neglect and negative politics, they lose faith in the State.
When we look at countries with such similarities, India and Nigeria come to the fore.
Both our countries are linked by common historical experiences of colonial rule and in the contemporary context, are united in the desire to work towards democratic pluralism, with the core values of liberty, equality and tolerance, while seeking economic development and social justice for their people.
Our main concern should, therefore, be to establish the credibility and legitimacy of the state and its institutions.
Aberrations must be resolved in a transparent and just fashion as public perceptions are important.
Management of ethnic and communal conflicts and resolving them are important areas of governance, as are the identification of threats posed by religious fundamentalism, ethnic violence, economic disparities and deprivation.
These challenges can no longer be ignored, particularly when globalization and information technology can make changes fast, furious and most unexpected.
A former Indian Prime Minister defined a framework for addressing these challenges:  "Democracies provide legitimate means for expressing dissent.
Kautilya called it "secret war”.
No cause justifies the indiscriminate killing of innocent civilians as a means to achieve a political goal or change of policies.
Terrorism is one of the most egregious sources of human right violations, and it has become a major impediment to development.
Your country, like my own, has suffered the horrors of this scourge of humanity.
Terrorism today has global reach, no city remains safe.
There is a new level of threat to pluralist and open societies.
Use of terrorism as an instrument of State policy is to be unequivocally condemned.
There can be no distinction between good and bad terrorists.
We need to restructure the international legal framework such as by adopting a Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism.
Societies that stand for peace and humanism have to increase their cooperation and strengthen efforts to prevent supply of arms to terrorists, disrupt terrorist movements, and curb and criminalize terror financing.
We have to help each other by sharing intelligence, securing our cyber space, and minimizing the use of internet and social media for terrorist activities.
Many illustrious Nigerian officers have been the flag bearers of our bilateral cooperation.
Today, we have an Indian Army Officer present amongst you as a participant of the ongoing NDC Course.
This augurs well for our cooperation in the future.
We must also find ways of using international opinion as a force multiplier.
No country in the world, howsoever powerful, can counter the emergent threats unilaterally.
This, therefore, makes diplomacy doubly important for developing economies such as ours.
Effective diplomacy is an important alternative to excessive defence spending.
I thank you again for inviting me here today and wish you well in your future endeavours.
Long Live Nigeria-India Friendship.
Your Excellency,  Mr. Yemi Osinbajo, Vice President of Nigeria  Distinguished Members of Nigerian & Indian Industry;  Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you for your warm words of welcome.
I wish to convey my deep appreciation to the Hon’ble Vice President of Nigeria for his encouraging presence here today.
I see from your agenda that you would be holding intensive deliberations on expanding our existing commercial relations as well as for identifying new sectors of economic cooperation.
I thank the Abuja Chamber of Commerce and Nigerian National Chamber of Commerce together with the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and ASSOCHAM India-Nigeria Business Council for partnering in holding this important Business Meet.
We are extremely happy to see the initiatives which Nigeria has launched under the sagacious leadership of His Excellency President Muhammadu Buhari.
As Nigeria embarks with renewed vigour and determination in realizing greater prosperity for its people, India stands ready to join as a partner.
The overall engagement between India and Nigeria remains vibrant and full of vitality.
Economic and commercial cooperation occupies prominent position in our bilateral matrix.
It is only because of the global decline in oil prices that our trade has slowed down in the past one year.
Nigeria is an important partner for our energy security requirement.
About 12% of our crude requirement comes from Nigeria.
It is estimated that the Indian investments have exceeded 10 billion US Dollars so far, and another 5 billion US dollars are committed.
Indian investments are in diverse sectors such as communications, power, pharmaceuticals, healthcare, automotive sector and oil, among others.
The market liberalization of India in the nineties followed by calibrated economic reforms in the past decade has led to sustainable economic growth and socio-economic development.
India's economy registered a growth of 7% in the last quarter which is one of the highest rates globally.
The fast rate of urbanization and the growth of a large, aspirational middle class in India, coupled with a youthful population make India one of the most attractive markets in the world today.
The last two decades of economic growth have also strengthened India’s private sector and it is keen to expand its global operations.
As such, we need to synergize our efforts in the areas of economy and business.
There is a considerable potential for expanding trade in the areas of automotive components, automobiles, engineering products, IT, pharmaceuticals, bio-technology and healthcare sectors.
Infrastructure development and energy security are key areas for cooperation for emerging economies like India and Nigeria.
These sectors allow for both our countries to collaborate and benefit from each other's expertise.
Infrastructure stimulation programmes launched by the Government of India, like the mission to develop 100 Smart Cities, upgrade infrastructure development in urban and rural areas and enhance nationwide connectivity through the 'Digital India' programme, have created massive opportunities for foreign partners in the Indian economy.
Our societies are still largely agrarian.
The Green Alternative Plan - a roadmap to make Nigeria not only self-sufficient in agriculture but also a major exporter of quality agricultural products, launched last month offers an opportunity for sharing of India's experience in agro-industry sector.
India's expertise and proven capabilities in production of pharmaceuticals, especially generic medicines at affordable cost, advancement in healthcare sectors and science & technology, high quality education at reasonable cost could also be potential areas of investments by both sides.
Indian private sector is keen to further engage with their Nigerian counterparts in diverse sectors of the economy.
In June this year, ASSOCHAM established its Abuja Chapter.
This is in addition to the existing Nigeria-India Chamber of Commerce & Industries (NICCI) that is based in Lagos.
We have the institutional mechanism to review progress made in the bilateral engagement including in trade and investments sectors.
The next Joint Commission Meeting (JCM) will take stock of the ongoing cooperation in trade and investments.
In the backdrop of the current international economic and financial situation, there is an even greater need for us to join hands and synergise our growth strategies.
India and Nigeria are well placed to convert this challenge into an opportunity.
I wish the Business Meet great success in its deliberations today.
Thank you.
Ladies and Gentlemen  I congratulate the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela for assuming the Chairmanship of the Non-Aligned Movement.
I felicitate His Excellency President Hassan Rouhani for the outstanding leadership that the Islamic Republic of Iran provided to our Movement over the last four years.
The world of today, Excellencies, would certainly appear very different to the leaders who took the initiative to meet in Belgardein 1961.
Our theme for the next three years – “Peace, Sovereignty and Solidarity for Development” – is in congruence with our founding principles andI congratulate you, Mr. Chairman, for shouldering the responsibility to carry it forward in this Summit.
We do believe that cooperation, and Development Cooperation, is an essential means of promoting and developing international solidarity, of putting a human face on the impact of economic globalization.
It would be a reaffirmation of our commitment as a Movement to ensure the dignity and development of all humankind.
This is epitomised in the theme of the Summit – Solidarity for Development.
The other two elements of our triad of objectives – Peace and Sovereignty – are a pre-requisite for development.
A peaceful global environment is essential for development and for development cooperation; such cooperation must be undertaken in exercise of the sovereign will of each member of the community of nations.
The interdependence of the three is thus evident and essential.
The impediments to each must also be discerned clearly.
Mr. Chairman, Today, the biggest threat to international peace, and to the sovereignty of States, is the phenomenon of Terrorism.
It has become a major impediment to development.
Mr. Chairman,  The United Nations lies at the heart of the multilateral system set up at the end of the Second World War.
World leaders at their Summit at the UN in 2005 had called for urgent reform of the Security Council as part of the effort to make the United Nations fit for the 21stcentury.
The Inter-governmental Negotiations process currently underway in the UN General Assembly seeks to fulfil that mandate.
We must use the forthcoming 71st UNGA to ensure that our discussions in the IGN move forward.
Mr. Chairman, In 1983, at New Delhi, the NAM Summit had noted that ‘the earth belongs to us all’ – and had implored humanity to ‘cherish it in peace´ based on the `dignity and equality’ of humanity.
As the largest peace movement of the world, NAM must be in the vanguard of the principal international debates on political, strategic and even economic and social issues to achieve that ideal.
I do hope that one of the priorities during your Chairmanship of this Movement will be to modernize the manner in which we function.
Thank you.
Bihar has had a place of pride in India’s history, played a critical role in the freedom movement, and continues it today as an important state in the Union of India.
Allow me to offer my condolence to the people affected by the ravages of floods in the past few weeks.
I am confident that the efforts of the government and the resilient spirit of the people of Bihar will prevail and they will come out of the ordeal stronger.
In not too distant past, Bihar was one of the most prestigious and  prosperous regions of India.
The Bihar Chamber of Commerce and Industry, thus, is an inheritor to a rich commercial history.
Starting as the Bihar and Orissa Chamber of Commerce in 1926, it is the 5th oldest chamber in India.
And today, as the Chamber celebrates its 90th anniversary, I offer my felicitations and good wishes for future successes.
The last decade has seen remarkable growth in Bihar.
Some sectors, such as Manufacturing, Construction and Insurance & Banking grew at over 15%.
States like Haryana and Goa have outperformed Bihar.
Bihar also has tremendous potential in the agricultural sector given its natural advantage such as a highly fertile soil, access to water from several rivers for irrigation and warm climate.
No less important is the demographic dividend that must be reaped by Bihar with increased focus on education and skill development, for both boys and girls.
In addition, it restrains government and others from infringing on property rights.
Should disputes arise, the rule of law provides a peaceful and predictable means by which those disputes can be resolved.
This principle is endorsed universally today.
The law is a necessary foundation for the promotion of business because the legal rules of a country create the marketplace.
The establishment and implementation of a fair and predictable set of legal rules is vital to business formation as well as the acquisition and protection of property rights.
Maintaining law and order will thus be essential to attracting investments for rapid growth.
I am confident that the government, with its impressive mandate and focus on inclusive development, is devoting its policies and energies to attain these objectives.
Nor can the external environment be neglected.
We are now living in a globalised world.
The existence of standardized and harmonized commercial laws provides certainty and predictability for international business.
They are important in developing uniform rules for the international marketplace.
The adoption of such uniform law can create an enabling environment to facilitate international trade and investment.
Since 1960, nearly 3,000 such instruments have been negotiated.
Almost all of these Agreements include access to the neutral arbitration of disputes.
As part of the Economic Reforms Programme initiated in 1991, the foreign investment policy of the Government of India was liberalized and negotiations undertaken with a number of countries to enter into BIPAs.
Government of India have, so far, signed BIPAs with 83 countries out of which 72 have already come into force.
Our experience has been that BIPA encourage foreign investors to invest in a State and there by contributing towards overall developments and advancements of the economy.
Looking ahead, I believe that the local Chambers of Commerce has an important role to play in fostering innovation and competiveness in Bihar.
The Chamber can act as a conduit for business to government interface, as also the nodal point for increasing the interactions between businesses and research institutions to help transmit innovations and new technologies into the industries.
I am certain that the Bihar Chamber of Commerce and Industries will leverage its vast experience and history to successfully play this part.
I wish you all the very best for your 90th Anniversary celebrations.
Jai Hind.
The limitations of the League of Nations and the horrors of WWII seemed to induce some sanity.
From these perceptions emerged norms of justified intervention and the much lauded Right to Protect or R2P.
The post-WWII machinery for the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples is functional and much can be said for its success.
It is only partially reflective of the generality of the UN membership today in terms of numbers and opinions.
Jai Hind.
The subject of today’s discussion, focusing on factors of poor learning, has serious ramifications for the making of an egalitarian society.
I am therefore happy to join you today to understand its dimensions and implications.
It is more than rote knowledge, must create the capacity to think, and is an essential condition for political development, democracy and social justice.
This is well understood in our country.
We also adopted a policy of positive discrimination or affirmative action by reserving seats in educational institutions for socially and economically weaker segments.
The cornerstone of Right to Education (RTE) is provision of free and compulsory elementary education, though the aim is also to provide increasing access to learning opportunities at secondary, technical and higher levels.
In the last decade, especially with the coming into force of the Right to Education Act, we have made substantial gains in spread of elementary education.
Let me list some of these:   Despite these significant gains, a critical appraisal of the elementary education scenario reveals that large gaps in implementation.
India still has the largest number of out-of-school children in the world, which is more than the out of school children in whole of sub-Saharan Africa.
There is great disparity between urban and rural education, and children from different social and geographic backgrounds have radically different schooling experiences.
Allow me to cite some aspects:  Several independent civil society organizations have flagged that the present education system, especially in rural areas, is not creating a heterogeneous environment for inclusive education to cater to the educational needs of socially backward communities.
Education level of Scheduled Tribes children, for example, remains a matter of grave concern.
Discussion on the document is in the public domain; the final shape of policy is awaited.
Education is a liberating and democratizing force.
It is an enabler, which cuts across the barriers of caste and class, smoothing out inequalities imposed by birth and other circumstances.
It ensures mobility and can redefine the social structure.
Education, that is equitable, easily accessible and provides equal opportunities – is the sine qua non for development.
It would determine the future shape of our society and polity.
I thank the organizers of this Conference for inviting me here today and wish you successful deliberations.
Jai Hind
It is a pleasure to be here today to inaugurate the fourth phase of the Vidyadhanam project, piloted by Prof. K. V. Thomas Vidyadhanam Trust.
Prof. Thomas has been a member of Legislative Assembly and a Member of Parliament for the last 30 years.
Throughout his public life, and in his various capacities, he has championed the cause of the socially and economically disadvantaged sections of our nation, particularly by enhancing equitable access to education.
It is but natural given his love for teaching and for this beautiful land of Kerala.
This audience is well acquainted with Prof. Thomas’ accomplishments.
I am informed that in addition to the present Vidyadhanam project, Prof. Thomas has also spearheaded several other projects aimed at improving the quality and accessibility of education in the district of Ernakulum.
One of these includes setting up of a digital library to make available online journals and books to the needy students of the district.
The Vidyadhanam is a unique project.
It not only provides financial incentive and scholarship to bright students from Government and aided schools, but also encourages cultivation of life skills, such as thrift and financial inclusion.
2500 each, which would be deposited in an account in their name with the State Bank of India.
A family’s financial condition should not discourage motivated youths from trying to receive higher education.
Public services like school education are the key to nurturing participatory growth.
Total public expenditure for education, at less than 3.5% of GDP, is presently well below the 6% commitment made in various National Education Policies.
While school education is primarily the responsibility of states, the central government directly finances 60% through programmes such as the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan.
In this backdrop, the decline in State funding in the key social sector programmes, including education, is also of particular concern.
The impressive march of Kerala on education, and other socio-economic fronts, is deeply rooted in Kerala's intellectual history that unleashed the progressive forces against backwardness, superstition, conservatism and casteism in the State.
Leaders from the state, cutting across political lines, undertook the challenge of combating social inequalities through public activism and spread of education.
The contribution of religious reformers such as Sree Narayana Guru, the Nair Service Society, the Muslim Educational Society (MES) and the Christian church to the expansion of educational facilities in Kerala, also helped in inculcating and sustaining spread of education as a social movement.
It is heartening, therefore, to see the spirit and passion for providing quality education for all being sustained in Kerala.
New and innovative programmes are being tried and implemented.
Only yesterday, I launched a programme aimed at attaining 100% e-literacy in the State.
Moreover, I congratulate the people of Ernakulum District and the State of Kerala for selecting this enlightened path for themselves.
I wish this programme all the success it so richly deserves.
Jai Hind.
The internet has been described as one of the most important technological innovations of the last century.
This is exceptional for a century which, among other scientific and technical advances, also gave us aeroplanes, rockets, jet engines, understanding of genetics, radio, television, anti-biotics and digital computers.
It is a means of overcoming social exclusion providing a "digital bridge" out of poverty.
There is a risk that ICTs may reinforce existing social and economic inequalities and that people who are being left behind, may be excluded even further.
This highlights the importance of integrating the use of ICTs into economic and social development projects of the government.
Most of this growth came in the rural mobile internet use, where the number of mobile internet users increased by 93%3.
That is a substantial number, however, given our large population; it represents only 34.8 % of our total population.
It means that a significant number is still digitally dark.
The global system for mobile (GSM) communication occasioned the preponderant use of cellular phones in India.
E-literacy in this context will relate to skills, knowledge, attitude entailed in the use of electronic devices such as mobile phone, computer, hand held and other ICT gadgets in personal, civic and occupational situations.
Specific e-literacy skills would include electronic data/information entry, storage, retrieval, appreciation and interpretation.
Thus, the lack of e-literacy skills seems more debilitating than basic literacy skills because of the ubiquitous applications of ICT in civic, work and personal situations.
But above all, e-literacy skills and access to Internet provide the citizen with an almost unlimited amount of knowledge and information.
This information is the key to empowering the citizen and for the making of a successful democracy.
It is therefore befitting that a network of library should be the hub of the efforts to bring about total e-literacy in the state.
I commend the government of Kerala for setting up this institution in the memory of Shri P N Panicker, who has left an indelible mark in the state and the rest of the country by his contributions to furthering the cause of literacy.
I am very happy, therefore, to formally launch the second phase of the total e-literacy program in Kerala today.
I am informed that the second stage of total e-literacy program would involve establishing 100 digital libraries, which will provide resources and information to over 50 lakh villagers in the state.
The quest for 100% e-literacy is reflective of that drive and spirit.
It is an outstanding attempt at empowering the citizens and providing them with e-literacy skills that will make it possible for them to participate productively in the global society and the information age.
I wish the project and those associated with it all the very best for the future.
Jai Hind.
It is no longer disputed that education is the foundation for a country’s sustainable development in its economic, social and environmental dimensions.
It is the key element of the right to a decent life and to individual development for reducing poverty and inequalities.
Equitable education is a lever to reach development goals in the domains of health, nutrition and the environment.
It gives people the knowledge and skills necessary for occupational integration and boosts productivity, innovation and entrepreneurship.
Yet, education extends beyond the development of skills for livelihood.
It creates the capacity to think, and is an essential condition for political development, democracy and social justice.
For this reason and in different stages of history, access to education was also a powerful tool of social and therefore political control in the hands of rulers and oppressors.
In the history of our own country, Kerala has been a role model.
Education played an important part in Kerala’s transition from a caste ridden society into one of our more egalitarian states.
The initiative was taken two centuries earlier and forms the backdrop to this conference.
As a result and over time, literacy rates in the state have historically been high since early 1900s.
It paved the way for mass mobilization for education and the creation of active citizenry that is a defining aspect of modern Kerala.
Professor Amartya Sen has called it “the constructive and combative roots of its historical background”.
These roots are Kerala's indigenous intellectual history and the impact of its global exposure.
The former was a result of historically pro-education outlook in Kerala.
The State intervention in making education more accessible was the precursor to the unleashing of progressive forces against backwardness, superstition, conservatism and casteism in Kerala.
Education became a social movement thanks to the efforts of reformers like Sree Narayana Guru, the Nair Service Society, the Muslim Educational Society (MES) and Christian missionaries.
Civil society activism contributed to it.
Opposition to caste inequalities took a pro-mass education form.
The spread of education helped overcome the traditional inequalities of caste, class, and gender, just as the removal of these inequalities contributed to the spread of education.
Kerala's politics, especially after the 1950s, continued in the same leitmotif of combating social inequalities through public activism and spread of education.
The Kerala Education Act of 1958 was a landmark legislation and provided for the better organization and development of educational institutions in the State of Kerala.
It was these policy measures that played a key role in making Kerala the first Indian state to achieve total literacy in 1991.
The spread of education in Kerala has enhanced the public’s capacity for assertion of rights for better health care, demands for more public services and monitoring their delivery, a better climate for gender equity, and above all, much faster reduction in income poverty than in many other States of India.
Kerala’s socio-economic indicators approximate those of the developed countries than developing ones.
These are a testimony to the transformative nature of mass education.
Infant Mortality rate (IMR) was the lowest in Kerala at 12, against the Indian average of 40.
These figures have their root in the high literacy levels.
The percentage of households availing banking services, for example, was 74.2 in Kerala compared to a national figure of 58.7.
By the end of 2010, even as the entire Indian economy expanded rapidly, Kerala’s per capita income stood at 34% above the Indian average.
As is to be expected in societies with high educational levels, a high proportion of Kerala’s domestic GDP comes from services sector and remittances.
Some have flagged concerns as the global slowdown and unsettled political conditions return to our extended neighbourhood.
Calls have been made for the manufacturing sector to be expanded as a creator of jobs.
However, given the impact of changes in manufacturing methods, automation and robotics on manufacturing, looking at this sector as the panacea of all ills can be fatal.
Other Asian economies like Singapore faced a similar situation some years back - of having service dependant economies with educated populations.
In order to remain competitive and to employ its talented, educated youth, Kerala too will have to focus on economic activities which make use of its unique strengths- an educated workforce, democratic institutions, and a favourable natural environment.
Kerala’s social progress has set the stage for its lift-off into economic progress that is socially and environmentally sustainable.
Kerala already has a well developed communication infrastructure in both rural and urban areas.
This should allow for a more diffused pattern of development.
Learners of all ages need to become familiar with new technologies and cope with rapidly changing workplaces.
Robust, inclusive and high quality education systems – underpinned by qualified, professionally trained, motivated, and well-supported teachers – will be the cornerstone of this effort.
Kerala’s experience has challenged the assumption that countries have to experience economic growth on national level to be lifted out of poverty.
It is the result of a realization of the importance of education and of dedicated efforts towards its realization.
I wish this Conference success in its work.
Jai Hind.
I am delighted to be in Kerala again.
I am very happy to be here at this event as part of the celebration of the Navapoojitham (90th Birthday) Celebrations of Navajyothi Sree Karunakara Guru, the founder of the Santhagiri Ashram.
The work done by the Santhigiri Ashram in Healthcare and Education sectors, particularly in the development of the traditional Ayurvedic practices, is well appreciated.
The Ashram has also undertaken several community welfare projects, including those for rainwater harvesting and sanitation improvement.
These efforts by the Santhigiri Ashram carry forward the legacy of Karunakara Guru, and form the truest tribute that can be offered to his memory.
Spirituality is a broad concept with room for many perspectives.
In general, it includes a sense of connection to something bigger than ourselves, and it typically involves a search for meaning in life.
As such, it is a universal human experience—something that touches us all.
People may describe a spiritual experience as sacred or transcendent or simply a deep sense of aliveness and interconnectedness.
Like your sense of purpose, your personal definition of spirituality may change throughout your life, adapting to your own experiences and relationships.
Karunakara Guru also challenged his followers to change their present way of thinking and move into a grander and larger experience- be meditation, prayer and service to others.
Spirituality is, therefore, about seeking a meaningful connection with something bigger than yourself, which can result in positive emotions, such as peace, contentment, gratitude, and acceptance.
There is growing acceptance that spiritual and contemplative practices are associated with better health and wellbeing.
Many spiritual traditions have a long history of using contemplative practices to increase compassion, empathy, and attention, as well as mental and physical well-being.
It is an interesting, and fascinating, aspect of the human spiritual experience that all systems of faith or belief have within them the practice of meditation.
The Indian experience is a particularly good instance of this given the rich interaction that took place over centuries in the areas of belief, consciousness and practice.
Thus we find yoga and meditation in Jain and Buddhist practices; similarly, great importance is attached to meditation in Christianity, Islam and Sikhism.
The convergence or parallelisms are striking even if rituals or modalities of enunciation may vary.
They all depend on sounds or expressions that evoke appropriate responses from the practitioner based on his or her spiritual background.
Nor is the practice confined to our part of the world or only of ancient vintage.
There is a good deal of contemporary debate about the practices of yoga and meditation, their utility and limits.
Yoga is a centuries-old practice.
The systematic practice of yoga has been found to reduce stress, decrease depression and anxiety, regulate blood pressure, and increase feelings of wellbeing.
This is termed detachment, in contrast to attachment, and is to be attained by practice.
Here the physical comes to the aid of the mental by inducing in the mind of the practitioner the requisite level of concentration eventually, reportedly, leading to attainment of Samadhi.
Meditation can induce feelings of calm and clear-headedness as well as improve concentration and attention.
Some researchers have reported that meditation increases the brain’s neural activity, which can reduce sensitivity to pain, enhance your immune system, regulate difficult emotions, and relieve stress.
Mindfulness meditation in particular has been reportedly been helpful to people in overcoming depression and anxiety, chronic fatigue syndrome, and cardiovascular disease.
Many spiritual traditions also encourage participation in a community.
Strong relationships can increase wellbeing and bolster the quality life.
Spiritual strength can also help an individual overcome hardships and finding meaning in difficult circumstances.
Spirituality can force one to evaluate his or her life and gradually change it for the better.
The change for the better is, in essence, the spiritual message that Navajyothi Sree Karunakara Guru gave to the world.
The change comes from introspection and by placing the welfare and benefit of others before self.
I once again thank the organizers of this event for inviting me here to be a part of these celebrations.
I wish the celebrations all the very best.
May the teachings of Sree Karunakara Guru continue to guide us.
Jai Hind.
I deem it to be a privilege to be here to unveil the statue of Dr M. Srinivasan, who would be remembered for his service to his beloved people of Kerala through the spread of education.
This college, as we know, was established by the great educationist and former Chief Minister of Kerala, Shri R Sankar.
Dr. Srinivasan personified, in his dedication to the betterment of others through education, the teachings and the spirit of Kerala’s great saint and social reformer, the mystic poet Sree Narayan Guru, after whom this college is named.
It is befitting, therefore, that Dr. Srinivasan’s statue be placed here in his beloved college.
Dr Srinivasan studied at the Travancore University and completed his doctorate from Aligarh Muslim University.
As an academic and an administrator of educational institutions, his contributions were well recognized and he went on to serve on Boards of several universities, including the universities of Calicut, Madras, Karnataka, Mysore and the Kerala Art University.
He was widely published, including in well-known journals like the Modern Review.
His work on the social and economic conditions of the poor workers of Quilon town was path-breaking.
Dr Srinivasan was also recognised as an expert in developing worthwhile systems for evaluating student learning and served as a member, board of examination at the Union Public Service Commission from 1966 to 1991.
Mahatma Gandhi said that “the best way to find yourself is to lose yourself in the service of others.” Dr Srinivasan personified this.
He believed that the best way to deal with hopelessness was to serve others.
Generations of students who have passed from this college, under Dr. Srinivasan’s tutelage, remember him with great affection and continue to spread his message of social reform through education throughout India and beyond.
That is the true legacy of Dr M. Srinivasan.
I commend the work done by the foundation as well as for their initiative in having this statue erected here in memory of a great educationist and humanitarian.
Jai Hind.
A publication of this vintage is absolutely delectable.
To some it brings back memories of days gone by; to others a peep into a past that will not return.
The founder-editor, Ramananda Chatterjee was certainly a man of vision.
Sir Jadunath Sarkar, no mean judge of men and events, described him as the voice of India to the world outside.
The contents of the volume tell their own story.
I am reminded of a 24 year old young man who started a paper called Al Hilal, created a Party of God (Hizbullah), preached communal harmony, established contacts with revolutionary figures like Shyam Sunder Chakravarty and was eventually imprisoned for three years in Ranchi.
I once again thank the three editors for resurrecting these writings.
I thank them for inviting me to this function.
Jai hind.
Despite this, an ambiguity about its meaning and practical implications continues to persist.
This emanates from three sources:  Perhaps these three questions should be addressed in a reverse order.
The challenge then was to adopt and implement an approach that would give substantive equality to this diversity.
The answer to the challenge emerged in the shape of a uniquely Indian approach – of combining the idea of equality of all religions with the principle of separation of religion from politics.
Over time, some of its implications have become evident.
The fact that both concepts had roots in Indian thought facilitated, on the one hand, the process of acceptance and, on the other, creation of space to dilute them in actual implementation.
A good part of Shri Godbole’s book is devoted to concrete instances of derogations from the principle.
Jai Hind.
I accepted Nadim Tarin saheb’s invitation almost absent mindedly, thinking it related to the release of a book on the Duty Society.
It goes without saying that the base of the educational structure is school education, beginning with elementary education.
This is particularly relevant to the subject matter of today’s discussion.
Allow me to mention a few harsh realities relating to it:  This then is the challenge.
Excellent examples of the latter are to be found all over the country.
The lament is that this is sporadic, patchy, and very unevenly spread geographically and community-wise.
This lack of community level effort is particularly noticeable amongst the Muslims.
In 2014, the then Chairman of National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions had observed that “in south India, the Muslim community has established centers of excellence.
But in north India, they cannot even maintain the educational institution established by their forefathers.” Surely, the good examples can be emulated and instances of inaction overcome.
In today’s India in which the operative slogan is ‘Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas’, educational progress starting with quality elementary, secondary and skills education is imperative if all segments of society have to be together on the starting line.
These, in a nut shell, stipulate a society based on the principles of secularism, Socialism and democracy, seeking social, economic and political  justice, providing for liberty of thought, expression, believe, faith and worship, equality of status and opportunity, and based on fraternity assuring the dignity of individuals and unity of nation.
These lofty ideals are realizable only through equality of status and opportunity which, in turn, are contingent on an educated citizen body.
We would do well to recall Nelson Mandela’s observation that “education is the most powerful weapon which you can use to change the world.” The power of education extends beyond the development of skills we need for economic success.
It contributes to nation-building and growth of an egalitarian society.
Education means more than acquiring knowledge.
It empowers people to develop personally and become politically active.
It is the fundamental precondition for political development, democracy and social justice.
It was for this purpose that the Constitution was amended to insert a new Article, 21 A, which made elementary education a Fundamental Right.
The fundamental right under Article 30 of religious and linguistic minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice has to be viewed in this context.
Many minorities have benefited from it.
This must be focused not only on the well to do but principally on the poor.
I thank the AMU’s Duty Society for inviting me.
I do hope that this seminar will bring forth a targeted action program for the education of the weaker sections of our society.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be here to inaugurate the JSS Science and Technology University.
This university is the most recent example of the philanthropic and educational services being rendered by Shri Suttur Math.
Since 1954, following the vision of his Holiness Dr. Sri Shivarathi Rajendra Mahaswamiji, the Math has played an important role, through its educational arm, in furthering ‘quality education for all’.
With over 350 institutions, covering all aspects of education- from primary to professional and technical- the Mahavidyapeetha has an iconic position in the field of education.
The launch of the JSS Science and Technology University, renews the commitment of the Mahavidyapeetha to the making of a modern and developed India.
This University, by its very name, professes to teach both Science and Technology.
Science is a deepening of the human understanding of the universe, while Technology is anything that enhances human capacity.
Science and technology have, today, become the most powerful drivers of growth and development.
No aspect of human life remains untouched.
In a competitive economy, there will be much greater demands on the scientific and technological capabilities of the country.
We will need more, and better, innovations in order to remain competitive as we aspire for faster, sustainable and inclusive growth.
The building of a science based, innovative and developed society, however, requires certain essential prerequisites.
It is an attitude which involves the application of logic.
Discussion, argument and analysis are vital parts of this approach.
Elements of fairness, equality and democracy are built into it.
The value of Scientific Temper as the basis of all social interaction was well understood in India and it was enshrined in our Constitution under Article 51A (h).
Despite this, and notwithstanding significant achievements in many fields, there is little evidence of scientific temper in noticeable segments of our society, including the elite.
Irrational beliefs and practices persist.
Secondly, we need a strong emphasis on teaching and research in basic science.
But it is equally important for India to be a science innovation hub to achieve technological self-sufficiency, and devise local solutions to our numerous problems like poverty, agricultural productivity, water conservation and climate change.
Our failure to develop manufacturing capacity in critical segments of the defence industry is a case in point.
We cannot hope to be a great power without a qualitatively superior scientific and technological prowess.
Basic science education needs to be given due respect to foster a scientific temper and culture.
This approach precludes imposition of any ideology.
There can be no ‘cherry picking’ of scientific concepts in the interests of particular social, cultural, political or religious belief system.
I wish the management, the faculty and the students of this university all the very best for the future.
One hundred years is an important milestone in the life of any institution.
For a university, which ignites the light of knowledge in the minds of women and men, it is especially so.
For the past hundred years, your university has been contributing to the making of India’s knowledge society.
Thousands of students and scholars have passed through these hallowed portals.
It was the first university in India outside of the British governed areas.
Today, it has grown into one of India’s largest, providing higher education to about 85 thousand students, of which over 10,000 are Postgraduates.
Some 1400 students from 50 foreign countries are also enrolled at the picturesque main campus and various satellite and extension facilities.
Your success, and your reputation as a centre of excellence, is due to the efforts and excellence of the faculty and the hard work of students.
On this historic day, I congratulate you all.
The value of universities has long been understood across different cultures and societies.
Universities are seen as crucial national assets in addressing policy priorities, as sources of new knowledge and innovative thinking and as providers of skilled personnel.
It is pertinent therefore to examine in some detail what the role of a university should be in our society in its present circumstance as well as its future trajectory.
The term ‘university’ originates from the Latin word ‘universitas’- simply meaning ‘a whole’.
The idea of a university, wrote Cardinal Newman in late 19th century, is to be determined without recourse to any authority and should be based on human wisdom.
These included 1;  Speaking about the role of modern universities last year, the President of the Copenhagen Business School, Per Holten-Andersen, similarly, identified four classical and one modern function of the university2;  In the last few decades, increasing importance has been attributed to this fifth goal.
To see universities simply as instruments for immediate economic benefit would be a fundamental error.
The transformative potential of universities is most acutely needed in societies like India where we struggle against societal inequalities and deep-seated prejudices.
Our Constitution, in its Preamble, promises to the citizen of our republic social, economic and political justice as well as equality of status and of opportunity.
It seeks to promote fraternity among them while assuring liberty of thought and expression.
Universities can be agents of social justice and mobility.
They can foster fraternity and must contribute to social and cultural vitality and building an egalitarian society.
I wish you all the very best for the future.
Jai Hind.
Your Excellency, President Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj  Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,  The 11th ASEM Summit today marks two decades of multilateralism between Asia and Europe.
I thank the Chair, Mongolia, for the gracious hospitality accorded to us and the excellent arrangement made for this conference.
ASEM today is a dynamic bridge between Asia and Europe.
Our shared endeavour has been to promote multi-dimensional connectivity between our continents.
The theme of ASEM 11, “20 Years of ASEM: Partnership for the Future through Connectivity,” is, therefore, pertinent.
Physical connectivity is merely the means to meeting the aspirations of our citizens; to building mutually beneficial partnerships, and to collectively addressing our regional and global challenges.
The networks of connectivity that we build must be all-encompassing- not merely physical.
It must also include institutional, digital, economic and socio-cultural aspects.
Excellencies, let us facilitate trade and commerce, and build integrated production networks and value chains for mutually beneficial development.
Let us create energy alliances, such as the International Solar Alliance of solar rich countries, to enable energy security for all.
Let us build networks of partnership between our business communities as also among our universities, cultural and civil society organizations.
Above all, let us create connections of the heart and mind, to make ASEM a shared space of peace and harmony.
For us in ASEM, democracy and liberal human values is an important ingredient.
Our host, Mongolia, is a recent and successful example of the democratic experience and we congratulate them on their success.
All our societies today face unprecedented levels of threat from terrorism in all its manifestations.
The most recent example is what has happened, most unfortunately in France.
We need to cooperate meaningfully to deal with this threat.
Let us pledge today to work together to erase the scourge of terrorism by taking speedy action against the perpetrators, organizers, financiers and sponsors of terror.
I urge ASEM support for it.
Let us also collaborate to protect our global commons such as the seas and oceans in accordance with international conventions.
Let us resolve disputes peacefully, without threats or use of force, and exercise self restraint in the conduct of activities that could escalate disputes effecting peace and stability.
ASEM must not only shape the global agenda but also move towards concrete action.
A start, in this direction, was made at the New Delhi Foreign Ministers Meeting in November 2013.
India will continue to be a constructive partner in this endeavour.
As we look ahead, ASEM's inherent strengths – in the diversity of its membership, the complementarity of its capacities, the strength of its political leadership and robustness of its economies, must reflect in its ambition for the third decade.
I am confident that together we will elevate ASEM's role to harness the collective capabilities of our two dynamic continents, for the shared peace, progress and prosperity of our countries and regions.
Thank you.
The Central and the State Information Commissions therefore have an important role to play in the effective implementation of the Right to Information Act, 2005.
The new building, I am confident, will assist the process.
Free flow of information is essential for the health of a democratic society.
There can be little doubt that this is one of the most empowering and progressive legislations passed in the post Independent India.
The institution of Information Commission has also assumed a pivotal position in implementing the law.
The Act is being used by civil society organizations and the media to bring about positive changes in the levels of corruption and accountability.
Issues like public distribution system, privatization initiatives, pensions, road repairs, electricity connections, telecom complaints have been dealt by people through the RTI.
Perhaps its greatest impact has been in empowering the citizens and making the governments more responsive.
Sharing of information is a form of co-option; it makes the seeker of the information a partner in the decision-making process.
The transformative power of the Act however is yet to be fully realized.
The data available in the Annual Report for the period 2014-153, released by the Central Information Commission is revealing.
It also concluded that the number of women seeking information under RTI was also low.
RTI is a powerful tool.
It strengthens democracy and promotes good governance by enhancing the citizen’s ability to participate in the process.
Better implementation of this law requires not only political will but also an active civil society and an acknowledgement of its role.
Jai Hind.
I thank hon’ble Minister for Minister of Road Transport and Highways, Government of India, Shri Nitin Gadkariji for inviting me here today.
The Nagpur Nagarik Sahakari Bank is one of the oldest and largest cooperative banks in Vidarbha region of Maharashtra.
The bank, and the principle behind it, is a success story.
The principle of cooperation is as old as human society and forms the basis of domestic and social life.
The Indian cooperative sector is 112 years old.
Our founding fathers also saw the cooperative movement as an important tool in carrying forward the policy of rapid and equitable economic development.
It was, therefore, not surprising that cooperatives became a part of the national development plans efforts.
Cooperatives find explicit mention in two places in our Constitution.
The first 5-Year Plan focused on setting up cooperative marketing societies.
Maharashtra, for example, has been home to some successful cooperative movements- in agriculture, with the strong emergence of sugarcane farming and sugar production cooperative, as well as in consolidation of cooperative credit banking system.
The dairy cooperative is another success story in India.
The Anand model for cooperative milk marketing from Gujarat, with its well recognized Amul brand, provided the blueprint for replicating its success elsewhere under the National Dairy Development Board program, contributing to the success of Operation Flood.
In fertilizer production and distribution, the Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative (IFFCO) controls over 35% of the market.
In the production of sugar, the cooperative share of the market is 58% while in the marketing and distribution of cotton it is 60%.
In many cases, the success of cooperatives was not because they were the best alternative but rather because they were the only available alternative.
Cooperatives have generally found this transition challenging.
Credit Cooperatives have lost their central position in agricultural credit scene.
In the early 1990s, cooperatives provided almost 62% of the agricultural credit in the country with commercial banks providing little more than 30%.
There is also great variation in the quality and strength of the cooperative movement in regional and sectoral terms in India.
A number of Committees were set up between 1990-200515.
The movement, however, will have to match its vast outreach with market orientation to stay relevant.
I once again thank the organizers for inviting me here today and I wish all the members and workers of the Nagpur Nagarik Sahakari Bank all the very best for the future.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be here for the launch of a creative programme in the cause of integration of children with special needs in the mainstream.
I thank Hon’ble Chief Minister for inviting me.
Kerala’s progressive and innovative approach to public education is well known.
One aspect of it is education of children with disabilities.
Disability is an important public health problem, especially in developing societies like ours.
It is likely to remain a major policy consideration because of increase in non-communicable diseases and change in age structure with an increase in life expectancy.
The manifestation of disability, physical or intellectual, also varies with the social context, and rehabilitation measures should be targeted according the needs of those affected with community participation.
In our country, a majority of the persons with special needs reside in rural areas where accessibility, availability, and utilization of rehabilitation services and its cost-effectiveness are the major issues to be considered.
Research on disability burden, appropriate intervention strategies and their implementation is still at a nascent stage.
Persons, particularly children, with special needs mainly comes under the purview of the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment.
Some of the issues are dealt with by the Health Ministry.
The lack of a single focused institution often results in lack of unified programmes.
The allocation and utilization of funds for persons with special needs, and the social awareness for their integration and care, remains inadequate.
For rehabilitation, three major approaches have been (i) institution based, (ii) outreach based, and (iii) community based.
The initiatives taken by the Government of Kerala under its “Anuyatra” - or walking together campaign - for the persons with special needs, with over 20 strategic interventions having objectives ranging from prevention of disability to sustainable self-reliant rehabilitation and economic empowerment, is a laudable effort.
These differently abled children can be the best ambassadors for this innovative and ambitious campaign.
There is little doubt that these special children are capable of tremendous achievements, with a little additional care and encouragement.
I am, indeed, very happy to launch today the ‘MPower’ programme- managed by the Kerala Social Security Mission (KSSM), under the Social Justice Department in collaboration with the Magic Academy.
I extend my best wishes to the dedicated team of officials, teachers, trainers, volunteers and all others associated with these projects, who have worked tirelessly to realize this vision.
Your work is making a positive difference in the world and you all deserve to be applauded for it.
I offer my best wishes to this team of extraordinarily able children and look forward to their debut performance today.
Jai Hind
To students of literature, Boswell’s Life of Samuel Johnson is often cited as the model.
There could be other models.
Political biography is genre in itself.
A good recent example is Tom Bower’s Broken Vows, depicting in graphic details Tony Blair’s abuse of power as prime minister.
By these counts, Vinay Sitapati appears to have passed the test.
Rating must necessarily rest with individual readers; I personally found the book very interesting.
It is diligently researched; the end notes shed light on the sources and their orientation.
Shri Sitapati had the advantage of having access to the personal papers of Narasimha Rao ji; these included the information or assessments on situations and personalities given to him by the Intelligence Bureau.
The country, and the world, acknowledges Narasimha Rao’s role as the initiator for change in basic economic policies.
All that followed is meticulously traced in the book and in no need of commentary.
Two sections of the book would invite commentary.
These relate to the management of Parliament and to the demolition of Babri Masjid.
The Congress was around 10 seats short of a majority.
The opposition was split between a rightwing BJP and a left wing National Front.
These included ‘the very limited use of Article 355’ (the duty of the Union to protect the State against internal disturbance’).
The conclusion is unavoidable that the hesitation to act was propelled by political, rather than constitutional considerations.
Reactions to the event are a matter of record.
The book is a useful contribution to our knowledge of that period.
I congratulate Shri Sitapati for it.
Jai Hind.
The Asian Development Research Institute, through its empirical and theoretical studies, has done a commendable job of making social science research more inclusive and innovative to meet the emergent social needs.
Statistics has always been intimately linked to the social dimensions of the State.
The other use is in the context of constructing ‘social problems’, where statistics are used to support or discredit particular points of view.
Every new set of statistics, therefore, has to be put to test in order to assess its validity and usefulness.
Critical scrutiny could and should raise a few pertinent questions about origin, process and purpose.
Both necessitated optimal and immediate utilization of resources.
It was important therefore that public institutions had access to the best social statistics and statistical analysis.
The Civil Registration System and the Sample Registration System also provide fairly reliable social data streams.
The Health Information Management System and the National Family Health Survey have become established avenues of health related to statistics.
In addition, social and economic surveys by National Sample Survey Office provide data related to social and economic developments, industrial production and the agricultural sector.
Both the Ministries of Human Resource Development and Labour similarly have well-defined avenues for creating and disseminating data related to education and unemployment.11 And yet, all is not well in the Indian social statistics sector.
Based on the recommendations of the Rangarajan report in 2001, a National Statistics Commission was put in place in 2005 and the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation released a new Data Policy in 2009, and the National Data Sharing and Accessibility Policy in 2012.
Despite this, the problems with our official statistics appear to persist.
Our public statistics have also attracted opprobrium on issues related to measurement of parameters related to the service sector, the unorganized sector and unemployment figures.
In this context, some broad challenges in the area of social statistical analysis and interpretation can be identified18:  There are no easy answers to these challenges.
Perhaps the experts gathered here would shed light on them and suggest solutions or correctives.
I thank the organizers for inviting me and wish success to the conference in its deliberations.
Jai Hind.
I thank the Hon’ble Shripad Yesso Naik, Minister of AYUSH for inviting me to inaugurate today’s conference.
I welcome the participants from home and abroad.
Its Resolution 69/131 was sponsored by 177 Member States and was adopted without a vote.
The UN observes a total of 128 similar Days on different themes.
In that context it recognized that wider dissemination of information about the benefits of practicing yoga would be beneficial for the health of the world population.
Some years back I had acquired a copy of Patanjali’s Yoga Philosophy1.
It emphasises exercises of mind and body.
It is a truism that for an average person and in his or her daily life, the practical outcome of a theory or philosophy is more relevant than the intricacies of the philosophical process itself.
The argument is pragmatic and its basic premises self evident:  Human history is also a record of human suffering through disease and ill health.
The most telling examples of these are epidemics.
The Black Death in the 14th century, for instance, emanated in China or Central Asia, spread across to most parts of Europe, and took a toll of about 75 million lives.
Even today, the fear of pandemics continues to haunt us.
As on so many other counts, there is a stark relationship between poverty and ill health.
Poverty creates ill health because it forces people to live in environments that make them sick, without decent shelter, clean water or adequate sanitation.
The importance of good health, and of sanitation, was well understood by the leaders of our Freedom Movement.
Mahatma Gandhi had observed that ‘health is real Wealth and not pieces of gold and silver’.
He had on many occasions written and spoken about the economic impact of insanitation.
Besides these essentially physical aspects of the science of yoga lies its metaphysical dimension that, as Patanjali put it, focuses on the art of concentration and on the method of control of the modification or fluctuation of the mind.
This is termed detachment, in contrast to attachment, and is to be attained by practice.
It is an interesting, and fascinating, aspect of the human spiritual experience that all systems of faith or belief have within them the practice of meditation.
The Indian experience is a particularly good instance of this given the rich interaction that took place over centuries in the areas of belief, consciousness and practice.
The convergence or parallelisms are striking even if rituals or modalities of enunciation may vary.
They all depend on sounds or expressions that evoke appropriate responses from the practitioner based on his or her spiritual background.
Nor is the practice confined to our part of the world or only of ancient vintage.
This however is not the occasion to dilate on it.
It is a science, not a dogma.
It helps improve the levels of fitness and the overall health profile.
Most practitioners testify to its usefulness.
As for the more interesting philosophical aspects, perhaps some of the participants in this conference would shed light on it in their interventions.
I wish the conference success in its work.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be here today to release and present to Rashtrapati ji the book, titled The Education President.
The book looks at the catalyzing role the President of India has played in his capacity as Visitor of 116 central institutes.
This indicates the importance assigned to higher education in the development of the nation.
This book is intended to rekindle a debate on the governance of institutes of higher learning in India.
High quality institutions and a healthy higher education sector is an essential dimension in our quest to becoming a knowledge society.
Since independence, our higher education sector has witnessed tremendous growth.
From 20 universities in 1950, we now have 677 universities of which 45 are central universities and 51 are deemed institutions of national importance.
A feature of this expansion, especially in the last 25 years, has been the increasing participation of the private sector in higher education and, according to the UGC, there are presently 239 recognized, private institutions established under various regulations.
It is generally accepted that higher education is an effective investment, both for individual mobility and for social development.
Education falls under the Concurrent List of the Constitution.
This means that both the centre and states can enact laws related to education.
At the same time, the mandate of determining standards of higher education and research lies with the centre, as this falls under the Union List.
Yet, the private providers in higher education have largely grown in States and in a policy vacuum.
A bill to regulate the establishment of private universities, introduced in Parliament in 2005, was shelved after opposition from various political parties and private players.
These regulations need to be strong to ensure that private universities are well governed and provide quality education.
Jai Hind.
I thank the Tunisian  Institute of Strategic Studies for inviting me here today.
Tunis is  the city where, 700 years earlier, Ibn Khaldun was born.
He wrote about the  persistent human propensity to disregard changed conditions; in the process he  told us a good deal about the rise and fall of political and military power.
Other initiatives came forth for addressing human security questions pertaining  to economic development, social justice, environmental protection,  democratization, disarmament, respect for human rights and the rule of law.
Peace means much  more than the absence of war.
Human security can no longer be understood in  purely military terms.
Even more disturbing is the trend where non-state armed  groups appear as parties in violent conflict.
The traditional security  architecture has been slow to respond to these new realities, even as the  economic prominence of new players is remarkably well understood.
While  emerging economies have secured a role in the global economic system, the  Security Council of the United Nations remains a captive of its five Permanent  Members.
This intransigence has constrained the ability of the established  security systems to address the evolving nature of security challenges.
This is the global landscape  in which India  has endeavoured in recent decades to address its developmental challenges and  its role in the world.
Some of its salient features are:  ‘India is not a rejectionist power  that stands outside the global order.
A peaceful periphery is  critical to our success and we believe that the entire South Asian region needs  to grow with India  for our sustainable prosperity.
The South Asian Association for Regional  Cooperation (SAARC) has been infused with new energy even as we have continued  our bilateral cooperation with neighboring countries.
We have adopted an ‘Act  East’ policy based on enhanced connectivity with maritime neighbours to the East.
The deepening of strategic and commercial ties with the Indian Ocean Rim  countries have been a priority.
Our ‘Link West’ approach has invigorated  cooperation with West Asia and the Persian Gulf  littoral.
We consider the Middle East Peace Process as the key to resolve long  pending issues and prevent further radicalization of the region.
We have sought  enhanced connectivity with Eurasia through initiatives such as the Chabahar  port and related infrastructure, and the Turkmenistan Afghanistan Pakistan  India (TAPI) pipeline, a project whose initiation I personally attended last  year with leaders from the other partner states.
Our relationships with the  major powers have expanded exponentially in the last two decades.
We share a  strategic relation with the United    States and our cooperation has deepened  across a range of activities on the foundations of a convergence of our  economic and political views.
With Russia we have had traditionally  good relations, which have expanded significantly in energy and defence  co-operation sectors.
With China,  the bilateral trade has expanded considerably with new avenues of economic  cooperation being created.
With Japan a range of cooperation activities are  being implemented, especially in the infrastructure sector.
We have reached out to our  friends in Africa through initiatives such as India Africa Forum Summit, held  last year in New Delhi.
We convened a conclave of South Pacific islands to explore issues of mutual  interest and define India’s  contribution in their growth and development goals.
With other emerging  economies we have collaborated, such as under the BRICS forum, to develop more  equitable global governance systems.
The agenda of global issues,  and of multilateral diplomacy, remains a matter of perennial interest to us.
India  took the lead at the recently concluded COP 21 at Paris to forge an international consensus and  has become one of the strongest advocates of clean energy, particularly solar  energy and energy innovation.
For this reason we believe  that any global forum which does not include India has limited relevance.
West Asia and North Africa  is not an unfamiliar region to India.
Historical ties, cultural bonds, shared interests and concerns characterize our  relations.
We have a vital stake in the stability, security and economic  well-being of this region and are willing to expand our strategic and economic  partnership.
There are several areas where our interests converge.
We also look to this region for ensuring our  energy security and for commodities such as phosphates.
This region, with its  young population and natural resources, has tremendous growth potential.
It can  act as a bridge between three continents of Asia, Africa and Europe.
Indian  companies have started to increase their investments in the region.
There is a  considerable potential for expanding trade in the areas of automotive  components, automobiles, engineering products, IT, pharmaceuticals,  bio-technology and healthcare sectors.
There are also areas of  common concern.
Terrorism has emerged as  a principal global challenge.
Your country, like my own, has suffered the  horrors of this scourge of humanity.
Terrorism today has global reach, no city  remains safe.
There is a new level of threat to pluralist and open societies.
Old structures of terrorism also remain.
There are countries that still use it  as an instrument of state policy.
There can be no distinction between good and  bad terrorists.
A terrorist is a terrorist; one who commits crimes against  humanity cannot have any religion, or be afforded any political sanctuary.
International terrorism can  only be defeated by organized international action.
We need to restructure the  international legal framework such as by adopting a Comprehensive Convention on  International Terrorism to deal with the challenges of terrorism.
We should strengthen efforts to prevent  supply of arms to terrorists, disrupt terrorist movements, and curb and  criminalize terror financing.
Relations between India and Tunisia have been friendly and free  of discord.
We share common principles and have a similar approach on many  issues.
India had extended  strong support to the Tunisian struggle for freedom, and today, India  stands ready again to provide all possible support as you embark on a path of  freedom and democracy.
Tunisia can  also be a hub for our trade with both Europe and Africa.
Tunisia  can leverage our expertise and proven capabilities in production of  pharmaceuticals, especially generic medicines at affordable cost, advancement  in healthcare sector, science & technology and provision of high quality  education at reasonable cost to its advantage.
I thank you for being such  patient listeners.
I will try to answer a few questions if you have any.
A traveller from a distant land in mashriq-al-aqsa comes  to Maghrib-al Aqsa and marvels at his good fortune.
His sense of history  quickly reminds him that centuries earlier a great name from this land had  travelled to India  and recorded in some detail his impressions about the governance, manner and  customs of Indians.
He attained high office and also had his share of minor  misfortunes.
I refer, of course, to Sheikh Abdullah Mohammad ibn  Abdullah ibn Mohammad ibn Ibralim al Lawati, better known as Ibn Batuta of  Tanja.
I thank the Government of the Kingdom  of Morocco, and His Excellency the  Rector of the University, for inviting me to address the Mohammad V University today.
Even in distant India, the contribution of Moroccan  intellectuals to modern thought and challenges is known and acknowledged.
The  challenge in each case was that of modernity and the contemporary responses to  it.
This included the debates on Arabism,  nationalism, democracy and Islam.
Much has also been written about the trauma,  self or externally inflicted, experienced individually and collectively by Arab  societies in the past seven decades.
The misfortunes visited on Arab lands  since the 19th century was in good measure a result of their proximity  to Europe in the age of imperialism.
II I would like to pause here and take up a related  matter to draw the attention of the audience to some terminological questions.
In  current discussions in many places, the terms ‘Arab’ and ‘Islam’ are used  together or interchangeably.
Islam is a global faith, and its  adherents are in all parts of the world.
The history of Islam as a faith, and  of Muslims as its adherents, is rich and diversified.
In different ages and in  different regions the Muslim contribution to civilisation has been note worthy.
The Pew Research Center  of the United States  has published country-wise and region-wise religious composition and  projections for 198 countries for the period 2010 to 2050.
It indicates that in  2010 Muslims numbered 1.59 billion out of which 986 million were in  Asia-Pacific.
The comparative figures for West Asia–North Africa would be  317 and 381 million (19.9% and 20.52%) and for Sub-Saharan Africa 248 and 329  million (15.59% and 17.31%) respectively.
Within the Asia-Pacific region Indonesia, India,  Pakistan, Bangladesh, Iran,  Turkey  together would account for 830 million in 2010 and 954 million in 2020.
These numbers underline the fact that an overwhelming  number of Muslims of the world are non-Arabs and live in societies that are not  Arab.
Equally relevant is the historical fact they contributed to and benefited  from the civilisation of Islam in full measure.
This trend continues to this  day.
These  segments include countries with Muslim majorities (principally Indonesia, Bangladesh,  Pakistan, Iran, and Turkey)  as also those where followers of the Islamic faith do not constitute a majority  of the population (India, China, and Philippines).
Amongst both categories, India is sui generis.
India counts  amongst its citizens the second largest Muslim population in the world.
It  numbers 180 million and accounts for 14.2 percent of the country’s total  population of 1.3 billion.
Furthermore, religious minorities as a whole  (Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, and Parsis or Zoroastrians) constitute  19.4 percent of the population of India.
India’s interaction with Islam and Muslims began  early and bears the imprint of history.
Indian Muslims have lived in India’s  religiously plural society for over a thousand years, at times as rulers, at  others as subjects and now as citizens.
They are not homogenous in racial or  linguistic terms and bear the impact of local cultural surroundings, in manners  and customs, in varying degrees.
Thus Baghdad  became the seeker, and dispenser, of Indian numerals and sciences.
The Panchatantra was translated and became Kalila wa Dimna.
Alberuni, who studied India and  Indians more thoroughly than most, produced a virtual encyclopedia on religion,  rituals, manners and customs, philosophy, mathematics and astronomy.
He  commenced his great work by highlighting differences, but was careful enough  ‘to relate, not criticize’.
Over centuries of intermingling and interaction, an  Indo-Islamic culture developed in India.
In this manner the values of  faith, though not its theological content, reached a wider circle of the  public.
III  It  is this backdrop that has impacted on modern India and its existential reality  of a plural society on the basis of which a democratic polity and a secular  state structure was put in place.
The  framers of our Constitution had the objective of securing civic,  political, economic, social and cultural rights as essential ingredients of  citizenship.
Particular emphasis was placed on rights of religious minorities.
Furthermore, all religious or linguistic minorities shall have the right to  establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
The corrective lies in our functioning  democracy, its accountability mechanisms including regularity of elections at  all levels from village and district councils to regional and national levels,  the Rule of Law, and heightened levels of public awareness of public issues.
There is no inclination in  their ranks to resort to ideologies and practices of violence.
On a visit to Jakarta  a few months back, I had occasion to solicit their views on contemporary  debates on Political Islam.
They said Islam in Indonesia has united with the  culture of the people and their Islamic traditions have adapted themselves to  local conditions.
They felt Indonesian Muslims are moderate in their outlook,  that Islam does not advocate extremism, and that radicalization of Islam is  harmful and does not benefit the community.
Both  instances cited above indicate that in countries having complex societal makeup,  accommodation of diversity in political structures and socio-economic policies  is not an option but an imperative necessity ignoring which can have unpleasant  consequences.
IV  I come back to the principal theme of this talk.
All necessitate the emergence of a set of norms, values and practices  that are universally accepted.
In a  world of intrinsically diverse societies at different levels of development,  this could only result in denial of their diversity and imposition of  uniformity.
Such an approach can only result in conflict.
The challenge for the modern world is to accept diversity  as an existential reality and to configure attitudes and methodologies for  dealing with it.
We in India  are attempting it, cannot yet say that we have succeeded, but are committed to  continue the effort.
We invite all right-minded people to join us in this  endeavour.
There is precariously little that I can tell this group of practitioners in the field.
This is particularly so in areas of non-traditional security.
We in India have both the advantages and disadvantages of size.
Our size, resources and potential gives us the chance to reflect it on the global stage; our handicaps constrain the effort.
The challenges are mostly in the developmental field: to attain balance development.
Poverty, hunger, uneven distribution of resources, natural or man-made calamities stare us in the face on a daily basis.
We are growing at about 7% in GDP terms yet about 30 percent of our people live below the official poverty line.
We are citizens of a vibrant democracy, and are lauded for it.
Yet our democracy has its shortfalls.
In actual practice, seewe are more an electoral democracy than a deliberative one.
Over the years, sessions of Parliament and of state legislature have become shorter and shorter.
The focus, instead, is on one-liners to score points rather than to analyse problems.
Our state structure is evolving.
Technically, we are a Union of States.
Practically, we are now seeking to put into operation a form of ‘cooperative federalism’.
This has operational implications for the conduct of foreign policy.
Some instances of it are known to you; others may surface in the future.
A commentator has written yesterday that the foreign policy score card of the Government after two years in office reads 6 out of 10, and that it would have been 8 out of 10 if Nepal and China were counted as success.
Professionals know only to well that foreign policy is always work in progress.
There is no such thing as a perfect relationship and even when failure is evident, the room for diplomacy is never to be ruled out.
Hence the old dictum: the requirement for a diplomat is to negotiate continuously directly as well as in more devious ways and in all places.
This is a beautifully produced volume.
It is a work of art and brings to mind the Prophetic Saying: Inna Allah hu jameel-un uhibbul jamal – Allah is beautiful and loves beauty.
It should be welcomed for its aesthetic presentation as also to its content.
The book is an effort to remove the popular and prejudiced impressions about Islam as a faith and Muslims as a people.
The aim is to celebrate Islam, rooted in its core values and expressing them in their inherent flexibility, progression, reception and interaction.
The Indian experience of a large Muslim minority living in secular polity having a composite culture could even be a model for others to emulate.
The choice of approach may be critical.
Both prudence and technique would be essential for making and implementing the choice.
I compliment the National Institute of Faith Leadership in taking forward this initiative and wish that this book will reach its message to a wide audience.
Jai Hind.
I thank Chief Justice Chandrachud and Mr. Justice Husnain for this and I fervently pray that I would justify their gamble.
The Allahabad High Court of Judicature is one of the oldest high courts in the country.
Today, it is the biggest in terms of work load, the number of judges and, regrettably, in terms of vacancies on the bench.
The Lucknow Bench of High Court itself has had a long and distinguished history.
I therefore take solace in the couplet: Go wan nahin pa wan ke nikale huai to hain                         Kaabe se in butoen ko bhai nisbat hai door ki I have a subjective reason too for succumbing to the temptation.
A distant relation of mine on my mother’s side was the first Indian Chief Justice of the Allahabad High Court.
I refer to Sir Shah Mohammad Sulaiman who presided over this Court from 1932 to 1937 before becoming a judge of the Federal Court of India established under the Government of India Act, 1935.
II It has been said often enough that fundamentals of faith must be revisited in order to reinforce faith.
One of our articles of faith as citizens of the Republic of India is the Rule of Law.
The term is a part of our daily vocabulary.
Its basic purpose is, as Montesquieu said a long time back, is avoidance of tyrannical laws or their execution in a tyrannical manner.
Its classic enunciation is to be found in Albert Dicey, who needs no introduction to this audience.
To him, the essential ingredients of rule of law were (a) the absolute supremacy of regular law (b) equality before the law (c) access to justice and development of law by the judges on a case by case basis.
As the former Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales Lord Bingham put it, ‘it makes the difference between Good and Bad Government.’  Over time and in different societies, these principles have been challenged, amplified and modified.
Professor Baxi opines that the Indian constitutional conception of the rule of law links its four core notions: rights, development, governance and justice.
Rule of Law, said the Supreme Court in Dalmia Cement (Bharat) Ltd v Union of India (1996) ‘is a potent instrument of social justice to bring about equality in result’.
This is particularly true of its good work in expanding the ambit of rights.
On the other hand, lack of access to justice, the high cost of it, delays in the delivery of justice, lack of a mechanism for accountability and allegations of corruption have, together, given rise to doubts and added to the pervasive pessimism about the efficacy of institutions.
One law officer has also expressed concern over the ‘increasing disregard of the salutary doctrine of precedents’.
Judgments in an earlier generation were concise and cryptic and adjournments were allowed only for good reason.
There is no reason why verbosity cannot be restrained.
Courts can fulfill their responsibility in a democratic society only to the extent they succeed in shaping their judgment by rational standards, and rational standards are both impersonal and communicable.
Here too, a judicious mix can bring forth reasonably satisfactory results.
I have one last point.
A changing world has made globalization an unavoidable necessity.
Thank you for giving me the opportunity of sharing some thoughts with you today.
I wish you all success in the years to come.
Jai Hind.
Conceived by Jawaharlal Nehru, the National Herald began its publication from Lucknow in 1938 and soon became the voice of our independence movement.
Its banner of ‘freedom in peril’ has an abiding relevance.
The history of journalism in India is closely linked to the history of our freedom struggle.
Indian journalists were not mere news providers.
They were freedom fighters and social activists, who fought not only to rid India of foreign rule but also to rid our society of social prejudices, casteism, communalism and discrimination.
The Press played an important role in educating, convincing and mobilizing our people.
Many founding members of the Congress in 1885 were journalist.
The most inspiring of the journals, like Tribune, Hindustan, Leader, Sudharak, Kesari, Akbar-i-Aam, The Hindu and Swadesh were edited by prominent leaders like Tilak, Gokhale, Subramanya Iyer, Lajpat Rai, Madan Mohan Malviya and Agrakar.
It became a medium of nationalist political participation for the masses.
The Press was a medium for propagation of modern ideas of democracy, freedom and equality.
The English Press emerged as a medium of communication between nationalists across the country and played a role in welding India into a single nation and in giving the Indians a sense of national identity.
This was crucial in mobilizing the masses for various nationalist and social causes.
Gandhiji was associated with six journals, and editor of two very influential weeklies.
He published no advertisement; at the same time he did not want his newspapers to run at a loss.
'Young India' and 'Harijan' became powerful vehicles of his views on all subjects.
He wrote on all subjects.
He wrote simply and clearly but forcefully.
For Gandhiji, journalism was a public service.
When, further a newspaper is treated as a means of making profits, the result is likely to be serious malpractices.
He believed that the media was a pillar of democracy.
He envisioned a free, unfettered and honest press.
He watched over the interests of media persons in independent India.
The Act, I believe, is now in disuse, and short term contracts, that make journalists beholden to the ‘preferred lines’ of the publications, are in vogue.
In an open society like ours, we need a responsible press to hold power to account.
The Supreme Court has held that ‘freedom of speech and of the press is the Ark of the Covenant of Democracy’1 because public criticism is essential to the working of its institutions.
Over the last few decades, press and electronic media have emerged as major factors in our nation’s life.
They are still expanding and in the process becoming more inquisitive.
Our system of government demands as do the systems of government of the United States of America and United Kingdom- constant vigilance over exercise of governmental power by the press and the media among others.
It is essential for a good Government.” 2 The duty of the State is thus clear.
A free media is not only beneficial but necessary in a free society.
If press freedom is attacked, it will result in the jeopardising of citizen’s rights.
Our Constitutional framework provides for required intervention by the State to ensure smooth working of the press and the society.
The laws provide that such intervention should only be in the interest of the public at large.
The media, if it is to remain true to its calling, has to do likewise.
I am happy to learn that National Herald resumes publication in both print and digital formats.
I am sure that it will uphold the standards of journalism that Jawaharlal Nehru enshrined in his newspaper.
Jai Hind.
I thank you for inviting me here to address this convention on a very pertinent issue.
The idea of education as a means to social change and equality, informed the vision of our founding fathers as they drafted India’s Constitution.
Equality of opportunity as outlined in the preamble of the Indian Constitution has been widely interpreted to include equality in provision of education.
The Act was a ground breaking piece of legislation, the first in the world that puts the responsibility of ensuring student enrollment, attendance and completion of elementary education on the Government.
The cornerstone of Right to Education is provision of free and compulsory primary education, though the aim is also to provide increasing access to learning opportunities at secondary, technical and higher levels.
It was envisaged that under the RTE Act, teaching and learning processes would be stress-free.
A programme for curricular reform was also envisaged to provide for a child friendly learning system, which is at once relevant and empowering.
On 31 March 2016, we will mark six years of the coming into force of the Right to Education.
An audit is therefore appropriate, particularly to locate deficiencies that exist, and chart out a course for the future.
In the last six years, the Right to Education Act has shown promising developments.
Some 3.5 lakh schools have been opened in the last decade and 99% of India’s rural population now has a primary school within a one kilometre radius.
For boys, the enrollment at primary level is now 52%.
II These are significant gains.
Yet a critical appraisal of the functioning of the Right to Education reveals that large gaps exist in its implementation.
There is a huge disparity between the urban and rural education and rich and poor children have radically different schooling experiences.
One of the most stringent criticisms of the RTE has been the quality of education being provided.
The Global Monitoring Report 2012 ranked India a low 102 out of the 120 countries on the Education for All (EFA) Development Index, based on progress in universal primary education, adult literacy, gender parity and the quality of education.
For instance, only a fourth of all children in standard III could read a standard II text fluently, a drop of more than 5% over five years, according to the 2014 Annual Status Report on Education Report (ASER).
Low learning and falling quality of education imparted to children has grave implications for the future of our society and the country.
This should be a cause for serious concern to the government.
The quality of education suffers due to understaffing and lack of training of teachers.
The flow of public funds has so far been focused on developing school infrastructure.
Teacher training has been a neglected area.
Around 37% of primary schools were found to be non-conformant with the prescribed national pupil – teacher ratio (PTR) norm of 30:1.
Moreover, around 10% of schools across the country remained single teacher schools.
Teacher absenteeism, which is rampant in several parts of the country, particularly impacts the disadvantaged students.
The UNESCO EFA Monitoring Report for 2014, noted that teacher absenteeism in India varied from 15% in Maharashtra to 42% in Jharkhand.
We need many more good teachers- and the only way to do that is to make the remuneration more attractive, recruit better teachers, provide them with better training and monitor their performance and availability closely.
The next major challenge is the high number of drop-outs and out of school children.
Answering a question in the Rajya Sabha, on 10th March 2016, the Minister for HRD said that in 2014, some 6.064 million children remained out of school.
State and National Child Rights Commissions have been working actively with governments to reduce the percentage of children out of school.
To begin with, rescue of child laborers and punishing the employer is the work of the Labour Ministry and the state police.
The responsibility of bringing children to schools and providing them quality education is the work of the Education Departments.
Then again, monitoring implementation of the RTE Act is the responsibility of the child rights commissions in each state, which are under the Women and Child Development Department.
Coordination between various implementing agencies has to be improved to develop synergies and create an environment conducive to promoting Right to education rules.
The third issue relates to the absence of equity in education.
Of the 6.064 million out of school children, a whooping 4.6 million or 76%, belonged to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other religious minorities.
Issues, such as those related to the 25% reservation of seats for children from disadvantaged backgrounds in private schools; poor educational infrastructure in rural areas compared to urban centers; cases of discrimination on the basis of caste; and neglect of targeted elementary education schemes for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and other backward communities are serious in nature.
Inclusive education is inherent in Right to Education and the government must address these issues expeditiously.
III It is said that quantity, quality and equality are the three sides of the triangle required to ensure Right to Education.
Without any one of these arms, the triangle will collapse.
In this backdrop, the decline in State funding in the key social sector programmes, including education, is of particular concern.
Public services like education are the key to nurture participatory growth.
Financing for Right to Education remains inadequate.
While school education is primarily the responsibility of states, the central government directly finances 60% of education, through programmes such as the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan.
IV Legislation is one aspect of the matter.
Although state education departments and local education authorities are responsible for monitoring the implementation of the Act, this responsibility needs to be taken more seriously.
There is a need for having special audit mechanisms like in the case of MNREGA.
I wish you success in your deliberations.
Jai Hind.
I thank the organizers of this very relevant seminar for inviting me here today.
It is said that an editor’s is a thankless job.
He is respected, feared, even hated.
These are substantial powers.
The media has a transmutative capacity.
It not only portrays reality but can alter the perception of reality itself.
The editor was the personality of the newspaper- setting its tone and tenor, as well as determining its philosophical and political line.
Such an observation, serious in itself, dents the requisite professional standard of journalism and impinges on an essential prerequisite of a free press in a free society.
III Over the years there has been a change in the role and the position of the editor.
Jai Hind.
I thank the organizers of this relevant seminar for inviting me today.
We gained our independence in August 1947.
In the early years of freedom, food shortages were rampant, dependence of food imports was perennial, and food rationing was regularly resorted to.
For this reason, Jawaharlal Nehru said in 1948 that ‘everything else can wait but not agriculture’.
In 1951-52, the total grain production was 52 million tons.
Today, it is over 264 million tons.1 The centrality of Agriculture in the socio-economic fabric of India is thus self evident.
As a source of livelihood, agriculture - including forestry and fishing- remains the largest sector of Indian economy.
Therefore, almost half of the workforce in India still remains dependent on agriculture.
Agriculture is also a source of raw materials to a number of food and agro-processing industries.
It is estimated that industries with raw material of agricultural origin accounted for 50% of the value added and 64% of all jobs in the industrial sector.
At $38 billion, agricultural export in 2014-15 constituted 10% of our exports.
After independence, we undertook special programmes such as the Grow More Food Campaign and the Integrated Production Programme focused on improving food and cash crops supply.
Land-reforms were undertaken with two specific objectives.
Concerted efforts in this direction did result in substantial increase in agricultural production and productivity.
This was the ‘Green Revolution’.
Today, India is the largest exporter of rice in the world, and the second-largest exporter of buffalo meat and cotton.
India is the largest producer of milk, and the second-largest producer of fruits and vegetables, rice, wheat and sugarcane.
II There are, however, indications that the Green Revolution benefits have plateaued.
There is criticism that the input intensive approach has largely been irrelevant for 60% of India’s cultivable land which is un-irrigated.
These rain-fed areas have failed to benefit from public spending despite the fact that 90% of the country’s oilseed, 81% pulses and 42% food grains are produced here.
Since the early 1990s, liberalization and globalization have become central elements of development strategy of the government.
This has also had an impact on Indian agriculture.
Such measures were aimed at creating a potentially more profitable agriculture sector, which could ‘bear the economic costs of technological modernization and expansion’3.
The gap between rural and urban incomes has widened.
The survey found that more than 40% farmers were dissatisfied with their economic condition.
The figure was more than 60% in eastern India.
These are disturbing trends.
Since 1995, some 300,000 farmers have committed suicide in the country.
The recent mobilization- in support of demands for caste based reservations in government jobs, and not for betterment in Agro sector- by communities that have traditionally benefitted from Agriculture- also indicates the growing stress within Indian agriculture.
III Some policy experts have noted that public fund allocation to Agriculture remains substantial.
Their participation in agricultural market remains low due to a range of constraints such as low volumes, high transaction costs, lack of markets and information access.
This disparity is illustrated starkly by the experience from Punjab- a state which has undergone substantial modernization of the agricultural sector.
There was consolidation in the land holdings and the subsidization of fertilizers and electricity for irrigation.
Per hectare consumption of fertilizers increased and water intensive crops like cotton and rice were adopted.
Thus, while farmers invested more on growing their crops, their total output, and therefore their profit, continued to decline.
The subsidies on fertilizers have also resulted in the unrestricted use of chemicals leading to salinization and Nitrogen-nutrients imbalance in formerly fertile soils.
The Economic Survey for 2015-16 includes a detailed analysis of fertilizer subsidy and its associated inefficiencies and misuses.
Rs 73,000 crore, amounting to 0.5% of the GDP, was budgeted for fertilizer subsidy.
However, the Survey highlights three types of leakages for urea alone.
So, in a nutshell, only 35% of the urea subsidy goes to intended beneficiaries- the small and marginal farmers.
Agricultural experts agree that this is a ‘fertile candidate for reform’?.9 IV Agriculture in India intersects with almost every development agenda—be it human development, poverty elimination, rural development or environmental protection.
Agricultural capacity has a direct impact on the food security situation in the country.
It also helps in initiating and sustaining demand in other sectors.
A progressive agriculture sector, thus, serves as a powerful engine of economic growth.
The 12th five year plan growth target for agriculture sector had been set at 4%.
The Gross Capital Formation in agriculture and allied sectors as percentage of total GDP has remained stagnant at less than 3%.
Public spending on agriculture research, education, and extension is presently about 0.7% of agricultural GDP- much lower than the international norm of 2%.
In addition, concerted reforms are needed to achieve equity in terms of higher growth in disadvantageous regions like rain-fed and tribal areas and benefit small and marginal farmers.
Some of the areas for policy intervention may include the following11; More than 800 million of India’s 1.3 billion people live in rural areas.
One quarter of this population lives below the official poverty line.
The search for economic justice for a population of this magnitude cannot be addressed by relying on migration to the cities.
Rural-urban migration and absorption of labour in the urban economy has been slow due to the slow growth of employment in manufacturing.
The rural labour force will therefore have to find a way to improve their incomes in situ.
Strengthening of agriculture, thus, becomes a national imperative.
Rural India has chosen not to construct its interest entirely economically.
While politics based on economic demands is stronger than before, politics based on other cleavages – caste, ethnicity, religion – continues to be vibrant.
Politics based on economic interests potentially unites the villagers against urban India; politics based on identities divides them, for cast, ethnicity and religion cut across the urban and the rural.
There are Hindu villages and Hindu urbanities just as there are ‘backward castes’ in both cities and villages.
Mere infusion of funds might not be enough unless the underlying social gaps and divisions remain in place.
I thank the Hon’ble Speaker for inviting me to address this conference whose stated purpose is to highlight the role of women legislators as catalysts for national development.
The theme: "Role of Women Legislators in Nation Building" is appropriate and timely.
Just after two days, we will commemorate the International Women’s Day to recall, and reaffirm, that women are entitled to their rights and freedoms without any discrimination.
This is an appropriate occasion to share some thoughts on two matters of high priority on the national agenda.
The first relates to the women’s political representation and the second to the performance of the women legislators in the legislatures.
The two need to be considered together, sequentially, so that assessments and correctives are based on ground realities.
Women’s vital role was unequivocally recognized in our freedom movement under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi.
That is why equality before law was granted to both genders in the Constitution.
Giving women constitutional rights to suffrage is one thing, but its tangible impact in raising women’s power and influence in polity and society is an altogether different matter.
Notwithstanding the fact that almost 47 percent of the total voters were women during the last Lok Sabha elections in 2014,iii patriarchy and social norms have hindered its full reflection in positions of power.
More than two decades earlier, in 1993, the need was felt to give greater representation in elected bodies.
This took shape in the 73rd and 74th Constitution Amendment Acts regarding membership and Chairpersonships in Panchayats and Municipalities.
This initiative redefined gender representation in decision-making process at the grassroots level.
Despite the challenges of ‘proxyism’, women representatives have performed exceptionally well in the local bodies.
In recognition of the good performance of women in local bodies, as many as sixteen states have introduced 50 per cent reservation for women in Panchayats.
Other states may follow suit.
Here a paradox confronts us.
The increase in women representation at local bodies has not led to commensurate increase of women members in legislatures both at the Centre and State.
The first corrective has to be made by political parties.
Until then, at least they need to expand their pool of women candidates.
The leaders and whips of parties in the House need to overcome their own gender bias in engaging the women members in different parliamentary roles.
The task of nation building is an arduous exercise and a complex process.
I compliment the Hon’ble Speaker, Shrimati Sumitra Mahajan for taking initiative in organising this Conference.
I wish the Conference all success.
Jai Hind!
There are only sixty-six women members out of 543 members elected to the 16th Lok Sabha and thirty-one out of 242 members in the Rajya Sabha.
viiWomen in National Parliaments (Situation as of 1st December, 2015),.
viiiElection Commission of India, General Elections, 2014 (16th Lok Sabha), Table No.20, Performance of National Parties and Table No.26, Participation of Women in National Parties.
I felicitate Shri Mumtaz Ali and commend the jury for making this choice.
A celebration is a multi-dimensional occurrence.
It is a happy occasion; it is also an occasion for introspection.
Some questions do come to mind.
The dictionary defines ‘faith’ as complete trust or confidence in someone or something; a second meaning is as strong belief in the doctrines of a religion, based on spiritual conviction rather than proof.
‘Interfaith’ is thus understood as interaction between faiths or belief systems professed by individuals or groups.
Our definition would need to include agnostics and atheists since they too have a role in society.
Some of these related to belief systems or perceptions on matters beyond the physical world.
Interaction between these social groups therefore also necessitated interaction between these belief systems.
Over time, and driven by the realisation that concord is preferable to discord and harmony to disharmony, humankind in different societies sought an understanding of other thought patterns and faiths.
This was, and remains, the impulse for interfaith dialogue.
Record shows that it could be accommodative or exclusionary.
His Sacred Majesty does not value gifts and honours as he values the growth of the essential elements of all religious sects.
But the root of it is restraint of speech, that is, there should not be honour only of one’s own religion and condemnation of other religions.
On the other hand, other religions should be honoured too.
For whoever honours only his own religion and condemns other religions injures more gravely his own religion.
Either way, principled or pragmatic, societies have developed responses to respond to diversity of faiths within them.
It was this historical backdrop that propelled the makers of the Constitution of India to put in place a secular state structure premised on equality and fraternity.
India is no exception to it.
One option is to remain embedded in our prejudices and take them to their logical conclusion through promotion of strife to overcome the ‘other’.
The other is to seek understanding in the expectation that disagreements would be narrowed, perhaps even eliminated.
The first option is becoming increasingly impractical since strife would disrupt social peace, impede development and thus obstruct the achievement of national objectives in any modern society.
The quest for understanding is a complex process.
It proceeds from impressions and vivid mental phenomena to reasoned ideas based on factual information or conclusions derived from them.
Well known is Khwaja Nizamuddin Aulia’s remark that ‘har quam raast rahe, deen-e-wa qiblagahe; equally meaningful on this theme are the teachings of Sant Kabir and Khwaja Moinuddin Chishti.
It emphasised that this is to be achieved by action at state, social and educational levels.
Tolerance is thus a virtue to be cultivated.
Acceptance, however, goes a step beyond tolerance.
You can tolerate something without accepting it, but you cannot accept something without tolerating it.
Moving from tolerance to acceptance is a journey that starts within ourselves; within our own understanding and compassion for people who are different to us.
We need to challenge ourselves to see beyond the stereotypes and preconceptions that prevent us from accepting others.
Principles, however lofty and relevant will remain in the realm of the ideal unless they are accompanied by an implementing methodology.
It is here that dialogue becomes an imperative necessity.
It is only through dialogue that misunderstandings are removed and understanding promoted.
The late Dr. Asghar Ali Engineer had written an essay suggesting a set of rules for such dialogues.
Jai Hind.
He was a scholarly spiritual leader and a great spokesperson for secularism and Indian culture.
He was a person loved and honored by all, irrespective of caste or creed.
With his charisma and dynamism he involved himself in almost all the developmental activities of the State.
He gave a new dimension to spirituality by special emphasis on improving the living conditions and betterment of human life.
His contribution to the fields of Education, Agriculture, Rural Development and Housing for the poor has been significant.
Born in 1916 at Kallooppara in Thiruvalla as T.E.
Vargheese, he joined the Bethary Ashram, receiving the name ‘Benedict’, symbolic of the renunciation of his household life to embrace spiritual life in priesthood.
He was ordained as a priest on 24 August 1944 and was introduced as the Bishop of Trivandrum on 29 January 1955.
He was the president of Kerala Bishop’s Conference and the Catholic Bishop Conference of India.
He was an eloquent speaker, a linguist and a social worker.
He was also an ardent supporter of Nature Cure and Yoga Treatment.
The thousands of people who have reaped the benefit of the Schools and Colleges started by Benedict Mar Gregarious are living witness to the vision of this great educationalist.
He was the first Principal of Mar Ivanios College and remained its Patron for four decades.
Archbishop Mar Gregorios was an ardent lover of nature.
He advocated maintaining ecological balance and preservation of the natural environment.
He was a staunch practitioner of cleanliness and general hygine.
Archbishop Gregorios was a promoter of inter- religious dialogue and harmony.
He was ever willing to intervene on behalf of the administration in resolving communal tensions.
The life of Archbishop Mar Gregorios serves as an example for all of us.
His selfless dedication for the betterment of society and the improvement in the living condition of the underprivileged and the poor, his focus on ecological balance and his advocacy of education as an empowering platform could well be the template for building a sustainable and empowered India.
I pray that his spirit may continue to guide us.
I felicitate the University on moving towards this milestone.
Our relationship is not of recent origin.
Some in this audience may know that King Chulalongkorn, after whom this University is named, paid a Royal visit to India in 1872.
In 1915, we were honoured to receive another Royal visit from Thailand by King Vajiravudh (Rama VI), the founder of this University.
We celebrated the centenary of that visit last year and, in particular, the enduring links then fostered between the Indian port city of Surat and Surat Thani in southern Thailand.
The establishment of the ASEAN Economic Community this year has been a historic event.
This journey began in Bangkok in 1967.
To my mind, this is an apt illustration of the ancient links of civilization, culture and commerce that existed between India and Thailand.
These links give us shared perceptions of the evolving commercial and political environment in the region and the world at large.
Despite the large size and rapid growth of our economies, the trade and investment between India and Thailand remains modest.
There is a need to synergize our efforts in the areas of economy and business to enhance and diversify our trade.
We need to encourage our private sectors to make investments in infrastructure and manufacturing sectors in the each others’ country and for this the two governments are willing to provide a predictable and comprehensive legal and taxation frame-work.
Thailand has played host to ships of the Indian Navy and the Indian Coast Guard on several occasions in recent years.
We hope to continue this cooperation through technical, human resource development, capacity building and contributing to the development of Thai capacities, both physical and human.
II Since 1991, India has pursued a ‘Look East’ policy.
ASEAN was thus a natural partner for our engagement in the Asia Pacific region.
It is a partnership based both on a shared heritage and a pragmatic appraisal of economic growth and prosperity; peace and stability.
The up-gradation of the ASEAN-India relationship into a Strategic Partnership in 2012 was a natural progression in this relationship.
In recent months, we have enhanced our engagement in South-East Asia.
This was reflected in Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s remarks in 2014 at the India-ASEAN summit at Nay Pyi Taw in Myanmar: "India’s ‘Look East Policy’ has become ‘Act East Policy’.
A rapidly developing India and ASEAN can be great partners for each other.
India places ASEAN at the core of the ‘Act East Policy’ and at the centre of our dream of an Asian century.
There is a special emphasis on India-ASEAN cooperation in our domestic agenda on infrastructure, manufacturing, trade, skills, urban renewal, smart cities and Make in India programmes.
We have opened a separate Mission to ASEAN and EAS in Jakarta to further strengthen our engagement.
Today, India and ASEAN have 30 annual dialogue mechanisms including a Summit at Prime Ministerial level and seven sectoral dialogues at Ministerial level.
We have established three funds to support our vast agenda with the ASEAN- the ASEAN-India Cooperation Fund, the ASEAN-India Science and Technology Fund, and the ASEAN-India Green Fund.
Numerous projects are being implemented under these funds - ranging from establishing of a space station to fighting malaria to promoting agricultural research.
The breadth and intensity of India’s engagement with South East Asia is unmatched by any of our other regional relationships.
We have an intensive engagement across Governments as well as between experts, think tanks, private sectors, academia, diplomats, farmers, students and media.
This trident of Commerce, Culture and Connectivity defines the future focus areas of cooperation between ASEAN member States and India.
Allow me to dwell on some aspects of it.
Culture: From Borobudur in Indonesia to Angkor Wat in Cambodia, our shared heritage finds an exuberant manifestation.
The spread of Buddhism from India is attributed to Emperor Ashoka, who sent Buddhist emissaries to Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam.
Indian mythology and folklore finds reflection here.
The Thai epic, Ramakien is based on the Ramayana.
The Ahoms, the Khamtis and the Khasis in people of India have links with Thai people.
In modern times, many Indians emigrated to South East Asia in the 18th and 19th centuries.
Their descendants today constitute a vibrant community of people of Indian origin, contributing actively to their respective countries of adoption.
In consideration of these links, India is considering the feasibility of liberalizing our visa regime for ASEAN countries to facilitate Buddhist tourist arrivals.
The re-establishment of the Nalanda University, which has strong support from several ASEAN members, is progressing well.
Nalanda was once a world-renowned knowledge hub where scholars from around the world, including South East Asia and India, exchanged knowledge and ideas.
Now, we are working to create a similar world class university in the 21st century, with the support of our East Asian partners, and have offered scholarships to students from CLMV countries to study there.
Over the past seven years, US$ 25 billion of FDI equity has come into India from ASEAN countries and US$ 31 billion of Indian equity has found its way into ASEAN.
The ASEAN-India Trade-in-Goods Agreement signed in 2009 has helped in bringing about steady increase in trade volumes.
India is looking forward to progress in negotiations for a balanced and ambitious Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement.
Science, technology & innovation constitute a vital pillar of India-ASEAN cooperation.
India is planning to enhance the ASEAN-India Science and Technology Development Fund from the current US$ 1 million to US$ 5 million in near future.
India is implementing US$ 21.53 million project on Establishment of a Tracking and Data Reception Station and Data Processing Facility for ASEAN at Ho Chi Minh City, upgrading of the existing station at Biak, Indonesia and training ASEAN Personnel in Space Science & Technology in Dehradun in India.
We are open to offering ASEAN our indigenously developed GPS Aided Geo Augmented Navigation (GAGAN) services, which provides advanced navigation and location assistance and information facilities.
Special efforts are being made to develop a coherent strategy, particularly for linking ASEAN with North East India.
Other major projects on connectivity include the Kaladan Multi-modal Transit Transport Project and Rhi-Tiddim Road.
India has committed a Line of Credit of US $ 1 billion to promote projects that support physical and digital connectivity between India and ASEAN.
India and ASEAN need to focus on an extension of the trilateral Highway to Cambodia, Lao PDR and Vietnam.
We also have to work towards converting these transport corridors into economic corridors.
The Mekong-India Economic Corridor, which is expected to connect the industrial and freight corridors in India with the production networks in the Mekong region through the Chennai-Dawei sea link will have a beneficial effect on all our economies.
As part of our digital connectivity initiatives, we are exploring the setting up of information highways or i-ways between India and ASEAN.
ASEAN members and India have similar aspirations to have an open trading system through global organizations like the WTO.
We have also shown a strong commitment, based on the principle of common but differentiated responsibility, as we take up our own role to address issues related to climate change.
We are also together in the efforts for reforming the United Nations, particularly its Security Council.
The evolving situation in the South China Sea demands restraint from all parties.
We support collective efforts by ASEAN Member States and China to conclude the Code of Conduct to keep peace and stability in the region.
The spreading tide of extremism and terrorism is a threat we both face.
Thailand and India already have a robust cooperation in this area and I am glad that we have also taken steps to institutionalize such cooperation at the regional level.
Today, as ASEAN and India stand at the dawn of a new era, time has come perhaps to reclaim our past heritage.
Long live Thailand-India friendship.
Long live ASEAN-India friendship.
My wife and I are delighted to be here in the dynamic city of Bangkok, the capital of this beautiful land.
India and Thailand are natural partners, linked by history, geography and the close contacts between our two peoples.
My visit, the first at by an Indian Vice-President in 50 years, is a manifestation of the desire we have to deepen the flow of ideas, people to people contacts and bilateral trade between our lands.
My visit is taking place at a time when our bilateral relations can be described as excellent.
We greatly appreciate the role of His Majesty the King in nurturing these relations; just as the idea of Buddhism, though germinating in India, has been nurtured in this land.
We appreciate your Government's commitment to imparting greater momentum to the relations between our two countries.
Excellency,  Tomorrow, I will speak about India's ‘Act East’ Policy at the prestigious Chulalongkorn University.
Thailand is an important pillar of this policy and a valued partner.
Our cooperation, both bilaterally and in the ASEAN rubric, encompasses diverse areas of mutual interest including Trade and Investment, Science and Technology, Education, and Cultural Exchanges.
People-to-people contacts at various levels are the lifeblood of our friendship.
I am pleased that our two countries have taken important steps in the pursuit of closer cooperation, stronger connectivity and greater commerce.
As maritime neighbours, we have a shared interest in the security of international sea lanes of communication and commerce.
Our resolve to strengthen our bilateral engagement in the areas of security and defence will help the region as a whole and promote greater regional economic integration and connectivity.
We are both engaged in transforming our ancient lands in to modern knowledge economies.
India is a bright spot with the highest economic growth amongst the larger emerging countries.
There is growing interest from across the world in building partnerships of trade, investment and innovation with India.
I would urge the government and business community in Thailand to avail of the opportunities provided by a growing India.
Excellency, I see a very promising future for our bilateral relations.
With its unique geographic location, Thailand can be a bridge linking South East Asia to East Asia; while India can act as your springboard to West and Central Asia and to Europe.
Our talks earlier today have put in place a roadmap for further strengthening our economic cooperation and intensification of our collaborations in all areas.
Your scheduled visit to India this year will further enhance this vibrant and mutually beneficial cooperation.
Next year, India and ASEAN will mark the 25th anniversary of their Dialogue Relations.
We look forward to working with you under the framework of ASEAN.
We shall strive to strengthen the India-ASEAN partnership, as also the BIMSTEC and Mekong-Ganga Cooperation.
Excellency,  The challenges of this century have been enormous and merits common understanding and joint efforts.
Globalization of terrorism, impact of climate change on humanity and the health hazards which know no borders require global action.
The international community is grappling with issues related to migration and integration of people.
I thank you once again, Excellency, for the strong support extended by you personally and your government for strengthening our relationship.
I bring with me the greetings and good wishes of the Government and the people of India.
I am grateful to His Majesty the Sultan and the people of Brunei Darussalam for the warm welcome and gracious hospitality accorded to my wife and me and members of my delegation.
Under the enlightened rule of His Majesty, your nation has made great progress.
Today Brunei is indeed 'the Abode of Peace' and has become an example of a tolerant society.
The historical and cultural linkages between Brunei and India have roots dating back to the 3rd century.
These have given us the confidence to forge a strong and abiding relationship in modern times.
India was among the first countries to welcome Brunei in the comity of nations when it gained full independence in 1984.
The visit of His Majesty to India in 1992 and 2008; and again in 2012 for the ASEAN-India Commemorative Summit held in New Delhi, helped strengthen our ties.
His Majesty enjoys the highest esteem in the hearts and minds of the Indian people.
The sustained economic growth in India, driven by a youthful population with rising aspirations, makes India one of the most dependable long term energy markets in the world.
Energy trade is an area where India and Brunei have strong complementarities.
At present India imports crude oil worth US $1 billion from Brunei.
This offers Brunei an opportunity to enhance export of hydrocarbon to India.
The growing Indian economy also provides us with an opportunity to move beyond the typical energy seller-buyer relationship.
There is tremendous potential to diversify and do value-addition in the hydrocarbon export chain.
In this context, India is keen to work with the Government of Brunei in setting up a fertilizer plant that would make use of the hydrocarbon resources available here for producing fertilizers to meet agricultural requirement in India.
This will generate additional revenue streams and create local employment and thus be mutually beneficial to both the countries.
The Government of India has embarked upon an ambitious infrastructure development policy.
We are keen to welcome investments from Brunei in India’s infrastructure and manufacturing sectors.
We are grateful for the assistance and cooperation that has been extended by Brunei for India’s Space Programmes through the Telemetry Tracking and Telecommand Station of ISRO in Brunei.
We look forward to continuing our cooperation in this area.
We are grateful to His Majesty’s Government for the support extended to the expatriate Indian community in Brunei.
The quality of our professionals is a testimony to the strength of academic Institutions in India.
This is another area for us to collaborate.
We would welcome more exchanges of students, teachers and researchers from the academic institutions in Brunei, including this University.
Such exchanges would augment our people to people contacts.
We are also keen to work with Brunei to expand mutual tourism by enhancing connectivity and streamlining our visa and travel document requirements.
Information Technology has been an area where India has made rapid strides in recent years.
This can be an area for enhancing our mutual cooperation and India would be keen to share its experience and expertise in the field of Information Technology in accordance with the wishes and requirements of the people and government of Brunei.
As trading economies, both India and Brunei have an interest in maintaining the safety of sea-lanes and maritime security.
For some years now, Indian naval ships have been visiting Brunei and your ships have also participated in some of joint exercises.
This has laid the grounds for deepening our cooperation in the defence sector, including by training of defence personnel in various fields.
We would also be open to exploring closer cooperation with Brunei in other areas of mutual interest such as coastal security and disaster preparedness and relief.
India and Brunei cooperate closely on several issues in international bodies, including in the UN and the Commonwealth.
We appreciate the understanding of  Brunei  for  India's enhanced role at the United Nations and for its candidature for permanent membership of the United Nations Security Council.
India has a long history and tradition of harmonious co-existence between man and nature.
Human beings here have regarded fauna and flora as part of their family.
This is part of our heritage and manifest in our lifestyle and traditional practices.
We represent a culture that calls our planet Mother Earth.
The scourge of terrorism is a challenge for all peace loving countries of the world.
We are determined to combat this menace with strong cooperation from like-minded countries.
We would be keen to expand our cooperation with Brunei in combating global terrorism, particularly preventing financing of terrorism through sharing of information.
Both our countries have equal stakes in the security and prosperity of our shared Asian neighbourhood.
The scope of India’s engagement with East and Southeast Asia has grown steadily in the last two decades.
It is to the great credit of the ASEAN countries that they have led the way in cooperation and integration, not only among themselves, but also in the broader region.
We share your vision and aspirations for the region and we applaud your march towards an ASEAN Economic Community.
We value the support extended by Brunei in making India a full dialogue partner of ASEAN and in the ongoing India-ASEAN FTA negotiations.
Similarly, the decision at the 3rd East Asian Summit at Singapore last November on the Nalanda University initiative is deeply appreciated.
Our new ‘Make in India’ initiative opens up new vistas for investments from ASEAN into India.
These include sectors such as smart cities, roads and highways, ports, railways, power and urban infrastructure.
Similarly, we will also encourage our businesses to seize the investment opportunities presented by an economically integrated ASEAN.
Enhancing connectivity between India and ASEAN in all its aspects - physical, institutional and people-to-people, is a key strategic priority for us.
Our North-Eastern region is our land-bridge to the ASEAN.
Our excellent bilateral ties with our ASEAN partners, which are largely "sans irritants,” have laid a strong foundation for our Act East Policy.
We in India are confident that our relationship will continue to prosper and develop.
I thank you for inviting me today.
Leprosy is an ancient disease.
Accounts of its prevalence are available from ancient India, Egypt, the Levant, China and Japan.
Yet the disease was poorly understood and had no known cure.
World Leprosy Day is observed internationally on January 30 (or its nearest Sunday) to increase the public awareness of the Leprosy or Hansen's Disease.
This day was chosen in commemoration of the death of Gandhiji.
Gandhiji understood well the social and psychological cost of the disease.
It inspired an entire generation of reformers and activists, such as Babasaheb Amte, to dedicate themselves to relief and rehabilitation of leprosy patients.
It also paved the way for greater focus on cure and inclusion of patients.
The availability of effective multiple drug treatment to cure the disease, access to technology for early diagnosis, prevention and repair of deformities, as well as increased awareness in society about leprosy gives us a chance to stamp out this disease.
The Gandhi Memorial Leprosy Foundation, which was established in the 1950s has done pioneering work to combat the disease and to erase the stigma associated with leprosy.
I am happy to note that until 1st April 2012, 33 States and Union Territories had attained the levels of leprosy elimination of less than 1 case per 10,000.
542 districts out of 640 had also achieved elimination by March 2012.
The State of Chhattisgarh and the Union Territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli still have a prevalence rate between 2 and 4 per 10000.
Bihar, Maharashtra and West Bengal, which had achieved elimination earlier, have shown slight increases in prevalence of leprosy in the recent years.
I understand that 209 high endemic districts have been identified in 2012-13, which need our concerted efforts for correctives.
There is need to empower those who have been socially discriminated through advocacy and information dissemination.
More than the medical condition, the social stigma attached to the disease is a cause for concern.
But the work of people such as the two we are honoring today gives us hope that it can be done.
I commend the work done by the awardees in our fight against leprosy.
On this occasion, I urge all stakeholders to come together and make concerted efforts for the total eradication of leprosy.
I also wish the Gandhi Memorial Leprosy Foundation and all those involved in this mission all success in their endeavors.
Jai Hind.
For the past decade, book release functions have become somewhat of a second calling in life for me, almost an occupational hazard.
Despite it, today’s gathering is different for a mix of subjective and objective reasons.
I begin with the subjective and personal.
Dr. Ranjitsinh and I both belong to the 1961 batch of the civil services and have, therefore, known each other for more than half a century.
My fondness and respect for him is considerable.
The objective, and admirable part, of him is that he is a deviationist.
Those familiar with political vocabulary know that this is usually a loaded term, used for persons who for have indulged in right or left deviation from a certain path.
The result is before us.
The author converted an opportunity that came his way as a civil servant into a passion.
As the first Director of Wildlife Preservation of India, he designed schemes for establishing national parks and sanctuaries.
He was the Member Secretary of the task force that formulated Project Tiger, one of our most successful conservation projects.
He also worked as an Advisor for the UN Environmental Programme.
This book- part autobiography, part a conservationist’s handbook and part travelogue- traces the course of wildlife from the princely and British era to the present.
It is an insider’s narrative, an authoritative account of conservation efforts in India.
I felicitate him for this commendable work.
Jai Hind.
Turbulence in West Asian State Systems: Road Blocks in the Quest for Participatory Governance I thank the IDSA and Ambassador Jayant Prasad for inviting me today.
Over the years, these annual conferences of the Institute have shed useful light on questions of regional and global security.
The list of participants includes a good many experts who would speak authoritatively on various aspects of the theme of the conference and put forth different perspectives.
Such a spectre today seems to haunt all who look at the region of western Asia and northern Africa.
The apprehensions emanate from a dangerous mix of realpolitik and professed ideology that challenges the status quo in the region, and has become a threat to regional and world peace.
Two years back the world observed the centenary of the First World War.
In 1945 it acquired its own sub-regional system in the shape of the Arab League.
Annalists of the future would record the years 1948, 1967, 2003 and 2010-11 as turning points in the modern history of West Asian lands.
This local patriotism was sought to be combined with amorphous and romantic sentiments of pan-Arabism some of which were reflected in the 1945 Charter of the Arab League.
The socio-economic backdrop too was not conducive to stability and social peace.
Some years earlier, three successive UNDP Arab Human Development Reports highlighted the shortcomings of knowledge, freedom and gender.
The Davos Economic Forum reports on Arab Competiveness put the focus on the implications of population growth and youth unemployment and on the need for education and skill development to bring about a shift away from total dependence on a rentier economy.
Pervasive rural poverty aggravated the situation.
A similar step was taken by Iraq after its defeat in the 1991 Kuwait war and was visibly reflected in the new Iraqi flag.
In both instances, the purpose was empowerment.
Away from the Arab world, the most telling example of religious motivation for a political purpose was the resistance movement crafted to resist the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979.
The latter has resulted in a tolerant pluralism in the State, brought about by opening its doors to other peoples and cultures, because the host society remains alive to learning from other traditions, and other ways of living.
The former was a result of historically pro-education outlook in Kerala.
The contribution of religious reformers such as Sree Narayana Guru, the Nair Service Society, the Muslim Educational Society (MES) and of Christian missionaries to the expansion of educational facilities in Kerala also helped in inculcating and sustaining spread of education as a social movement.
The progressive aspect was manifest in the opposition to caste inequalities, which took a pro-mass education form.
Kerala's politics, especially after the 1950s, continued in the same leitmotif of combating social inequalities through public activism and spread of education.
Infant Mortality rate (IMR) was the lowest in Kerala at 12, against the Indian average of 40.
Kerala had a birth rate of 14.7 compared to Indian average of 21.4.
These figures have their root in the literacy statistics.
The total literacy rate in Kerala was, according to the 2011 census, 93.9% compared to a national average of 74.
The female literacy in the State was 92% against the Indian average of 65.5.
The high literacy has an impact on some other aspects as well.
The percentage of households availing banking services, for example was 74.2 in Kerala compared to a national figure of 58.7.
II I believe that the date today is as historic for Kerala as 18 April 1991, the day Kerala was declared to be a Fully Literate State.
Today, Kerala adds another feather to her educational cap.
The state is marking the successful culmination of its ‘Athulyam’ programme aimed at ensuring Total Primary Education in the State - equivalent to Std IV of formal education.
This is the fructification of the continuing efforts under the Total Literacy Campaign through the well planned and executed post -literacy activities and the Continuing Education Programme by the Kerala State Literacy Mission Authority under the Government of Kerala.
This Programme mainly targeted the adult learners between ages of 15 and 50 years who were denied primary education for social and economic reasons beyond their control.
The continuing education centres spread all over the state under the local self-Government Institutions with the co-operation of various government departments and voluntary organisations formed the spear-head of this programme.
Classes were arranged for six months for the teaching and learning with the help of text books specifically prepared for this purpose.
What is also remarkable about the project is that it was completed using limited resources.
The project also relied heavily on the participation of volunteers and the Panchayati Raj institutions.
The formal external evaluation of the programme has been conducted by the State Resource Centre of the Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India.
The findings of the report estimate that the programme was successfully implemented fulfilling all the aims and objectives as envisaged in the project prepared by Kerala State Literacy Mission Authority for this purpose.
It is, therefore, with great pleasure that I declare Kerala as the first Total Primary Education Achieved State in the country.
This remarkable educational achievement is a result of the enlightened political leadership of Kerala, the dedication of its public functionaries and motivated volunteers as well as the dynamism of the people of Kerala who have come to value the importance of education.
I congratulate all those who were involved in the success of this programme and the people of Kerala at this remarkable achievement.
Jai Hind.
Sree Chithira Thirunal Balarama Varma, popularly known as Sree Chithira Thirunal, the last Maharaja of the Princely State of Travancore, was an architect of modern times.
He enacted the now famous Temple Entry Proclamation in 1936, established the University of Travancore (now the University of Kerala) in 1937 and is credited with allocating a substantial share of the State’s revenue towards furthering education.
He oversaw the creation of several public services like road transport department, power generation projects and irrigation schemes.
He initiated several social reforms, including by codifying succession norms.
He is also credited for the start of industrialization in the state by utilizing the local raw materials such as rubber, ceramics and minerals.
The foundation of Sree Chitra Art Gallery, which features a unique collection of traditional and contemporary Indian paintings, and Sri Swathi Thirunal Music Academy, since renamed as Sree Swathi Thirunal College of Music in 1962, bear witness to his passion for arts and music.
It is, therefore, befitting that this award, instituted in the name of an enlightened leader, is being conferred upon another bright son of Kerala.
He has also served in various capacities in New Delhi, Washington, New York, Tokyo, Thimphu and Yangon.
Since his superannuation, he has become intensively involved in the public life in Kerala.
He has continued his passion for education by serving as the Vice-Chairman and Executive Head of the Kerala State Higher Education Council with the rank of Vice-Chancellor.
He was a Visiting Fellow on Foreign Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington in 2009 and he has authored four books.
I wish him many more years of using his exceptional talents and energy in the service of the land he so loves.
Jai Hind.
Great leaders always go beyond the purely intellectual or the rational.
They touch emotionally.
They construct an invisible bond.
They become the embodiment of a nation.
Jawaharlal Nehru was a visionary and a maker of the modern India.
He was also a man of letters.
Nehru loved India, and the people of India loved him in return.
Eyewitness stories about how India’s masses, rural and urban, adored Nehru are simply too many to recount.
Pandit Nehru left an indelible mark on the making of modern India.
The Indian Constitution owes much of its liberal and progressive characters to the foresight and vision of leaders like Jawaharlal Nehru.
One of the most important contributions of Panditji was the firm anchoring of Secularism as a core character of India polity.
It was firmly rooted in affirmation of social and political equality.
The word ‘secular’ is not a very happy one.
And yet for want of better word, we have used it.
It conveys the idea of social and political equality.
Thus, a caste-ridden society is not properly secular.
For Nehru, the fight against inequality was tied up with the fight against economic backwardness and underdevelopment.
Pandit Nehru was also a visionary of a modern India and played a major role in establishing a modern scientific and technological infrastructure and strove to promote scientific temper.
He oversaw the establishment of many institutions of higher education, including the All India Institute of Medical Science (AIIMS), the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), the Indian Institute of Management (IIM) and the National Institutes of Technology (NIT).
Nehru envisioned the use of nuclear energy beyond its use in weapons and established the Atomic Energy Commission of India (AEC) in 1948.
Over 45 Central laboratories in different fields of science were launched during his time.
He was also responsible for initiating the first steps to launch India into the electronics and space era.
For Pandit Nehru the development of Science and Technology was not an abstract notion or a means to military power.
For him science was essential for building a modern India.
It was to be a tool to eradicate poverty and want, an instrument of eliminating inequality and building a just society.
The scientific approach was to be the attitude of all Indian in their social interactions.
As one of the titans of the national movement and the first Prime Minister and architect of modern India his dynamic and towering leadership and progressive ideas richly deserve to be evaluated.
Nehru’s services were many sided and the book should be of interest every Indian.
This discussion is required, particularly in the backdrop of the dangers from religious superstition, obscurantism and fundamentalism at the present moment.
I thank the editor and the contributors for this thought provoking book as well as the T M Varghese Foundation for publishing it.
I wish them all the very best.
Jai Hind.
iDemocracy’s pioneer iiJawaharlal Nehru 1963: 327
Cinema is a complex and powerful art form.
It is a form of popular entertainment but it is also a mass-communication medium.
Films can transmit political and social message.
India is the largest producer of feature films in the world.
Whether they watch it in movie halls or multiplexes or on television sets, and even on their mobile phones; Cinema has become an integral part of our cultural identity.
While it is true that a large number of films are made for entertainment; the meaningful and artistic films continue to hold a special place with the audiences.
As an art form, cinema is perhaps the most dependant on technology and thus most susceptible to changes from technical innovations.
The medium of cinema undergoes a fundamental change whenever there is a new discovery in technology.
Equipment quickly becomes obsolete.
In this scenario, new aspirants need to learn not only the basics of the art and craft but also how to adapt with and adopt the latest technology.
I am informed that initial steps have already been taken in this direction and that the institute already has on offer three year diploma programmes in six disciplines, ranging from direction and acting, to cinematography and animation.
I also hope that the institute will develop a focus on research activities into the visual arts domain and become a centre of innovation.
The Institute could not have asked for a better location.
The people of Kerala appreciate good cinema.
Hundreds of film appreciation societies function even at the village level here.
The annual International Film Festival of Kerala has established itself in the international cinema calendar.
The provenance of Kerala should prove to be fertile ground for recruiting talented students and staff.
Jai Hind.
We are able break out of the cycle of self-promotion and greed.
We live lives of less stress, less anxiety, and less frustration.
We begin to feel more fulfilled and more useful.
Real joy is found not in being served, but in choosing to serve.
By doing good to others, we are most essentially ourselves.
The international charity Toc H has been spreading the message of service to others for a century now.
The Cochin chapter of Toc H commenced operations in the early seventies.
In the beginning it focused on rehabilitating Leprosy and TB patients.
Later, it engaged in rehabilitating beggars in the city of Cochin in collaboration with the Corporation of Cochin.
The Toc H movement is now, I am told, is focused on imparting educational services to the people.
I am also informed that as part of the centenary celebrations of Toc H International, Toc H India is organizing a football tournament for players across Kerala, in order to highlight the potential of budding football players in the state.
I would like to commend all the people who have been associated with the Toc H movement in India for their dedicated service to the people of Kerala and India.
I hope that the centenary celebrations would provide the Toc H movement renewed vigour and direction and that it would continue to serve the people in the same selfless spirit.
I thank the organizers for inviting me here and wish the centenary celebrations all the success.
Jai Hind.
It is my pleasure to visit the NCC Camp this morning to unfurl the NCC flag.
National Cadet Corps (NCC), the Tri-Services Organisation comprising the Army, Navy and Air Force wings, has been engaged in grooming our youth – ‘The Leaders of Tomorrow’ – into disciplined and patriotic citizens.
To this end, the NCC has always provided a wide range of learning and training activities for its cadets.
These include weapons training, drill, field craft, map-reading, camping, self-defence and civil defence programme.
In addition, NCC Sea cadets have training in seamanship, sailing and scuba diving, while NCC Air cadets receive training in flying and aero-modelling.
The cadets have the option of attending mountaineering courses and glider courses.
That is a long list of exciting activities that would appeal to many young people’s sense of adventure.
In the course of these activities, cadets learn values such as courage, discipline, confidence, and respect for authority.
They also find opportunities for interaction and co-operation, especially when working collectively on joint projects and activities.
The NCC, with its motto of Ekta aur Anushasan (Unity and Discipline) has been providing our young people with opportunities for self-development and avenues to fulfil their potential for growth.
In so doing, NCC is playing an important role in shaping the character and moral fibre of our people, and ultimately the effectiveness and dynamism of the nation.
I am told that the total number of NCC cadets stands at about 13,00,000.
I congratulate all of you on this smart turn-out and display and I wish the NCC every success.
Jai Hind.
Some years back, writing on the rapid pace of political, economic and social developments in our North-East, Sanjoy Hazarika described it "one thousand years in a lifetime".
He spoke of the despair of the people who felt "overwhelmed at not being able to control them."
Dealing with such a region was always going to be hard.
There are many truths here, conflicting realities, especially in terms of perceptions.
Indeed, it is these differing perceptions that lie at the root of most conflicts in the region.
One manifestation of this distinctiveness is the persistence of what has been called, insurgencies.
There are armed separatists in five of the seven North Eastern states.
The seriousness of the threats posed by them is evident from the fact that two Corps of the Indian Army are deployed in the area in addition to Assam Rifles and various para-military forces.
The States of Manipur and Tripura were princely States which, after merger with India in 1948, became part C States, the earlier name for Union Territories.
The Sixth Schedule was a path-breaking effort to give small tribal communities, disadvantaged by lack of opportunity — educational, political and numerical —powers through the system of autonomous district councils and protect their traditions, their way of life and their traditional livelihood.
To an extent, these laws have worked.
Dr. Subramanian’s book is focused on areas of state failure.
The net result, in each case, is alienation and public distress.
The challenge to the Indian State, he concludes, is 'the need to reconcile national and regional aspirations for justice and a better quality of life.'
For this to become a reality, structural reforms as well as a change in attitude is essential.
Subramaniyan is uniquely equipped to write this book as he was both eyewitness to and actor in the conflicts in Northeast India and the State’s response them.
His book is more than an insider exposé.
The book examines the role of state in conflict resolution, including the issue of the State response either being inadequate or untimely or being insensitive and in turn exacerbating the problem.
The book is timely.
I felicitate the author for writing it.
Jai Hind.
The World Health Organization defines health as ‘physical, mental and social wellbeing and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity’.
Modern medicine has been a boon for mankind but all too often we are also shown the limits of modern medicine, especially in dealing with lifestyle diseases and those relating to human psychology.
One of the biggest challenges to providing healthcare to all are the escalating medical costs, which now consume a significant portion of the budget of both countries and families.
According to WHO estimates, because of lack of access to modern medicine, and cultural reasons, about 65-80% of the world's population depends essentially on traditional medical systems for primary health care.
Hence the urge to know how other societies, in different times, dealt with the challenges health and physical and mental wellbeing.
History tells us that based on experience and requirement, the practice of medicine developed independently in ancient Egypt, ancient China, ancient India, ancient Greece, Persia and elsewhere.
It is amongst the oldest and most elaborate forms of traditional medicine in the world.
It needs to be seen as not just a system of disease treatment but a system of positive health for disease prevention and balanced lifestyle.
Other ancient Indians systems of medicine such as Yunnai and Siddha also encompass a holistic view of health.
They recognize good health as a complex system involving interconnectedness with the environment, recognition of cultural traits, and social, mental, physical and emotional wellbeing, both of the individual and of the community.
This slow and progressive development led to the birth of the modern pharmaceutical industry.
Before European colonization, these traditional methods were the mainstream medical treatment, and had well developed and established methods, practices and knowledge systems.
Many of the medicines found in plants, trees, herbs, soils and water that are used in traditional healing like Ayurveda, have counterparts on conventional pharmacy shelves.
Ayurvedic medicine still remains an important component of our healthcare system.
With proper development and study of the traditional methods and substance using the tools available to us now from modern science, the traditional medical systems, including Ayurveda, can become an important and affordable part of a holistic healthcare system.
In this age of science, no one can claim that modern medicine with its substance and surgical innovations is wrong or unnecessary, but it need not be the only line of treatment.
Such medical pluralism will entail the adoption and integration of biomedical healthcare with traditional methods, or concurrent treatment.
Alternative medicine, including Ayurveda, has gained wide recognition and become popular, not only in India but internationally.
With millions placing their faith in alternative treatments, it has also become an important and lucrative business.
In a recent survey of NHS users in UK, it was reported that nearly 40 percent of adults had used complementary and alternative medicine.
This requires that the highest level of research, teaching and practice is promoted in India.
It also requires that the Ayurvedic medicines and products coming out of India are of the best quality.
With the application of modern scientific methods to the ancient knowledge system, we can have the best of both the worlds.
Since its establishment in 1988, the Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth has played an important role in not only the promotion of Ayurvedic medical system but also in preservation and cataloging of the traditional knowledge, its principles and practices.
In its Silver Jubilee year, the Vidyapeeth is recognized as a leading institution in Ayurvedic medicine.
I am confident that this venerable institution would continue to facilitate the scientific evaluation and the eventual integration of traditional medicine into the national healthcare system.
Jai Hind.
I take this opportunity to congratulate the JK Organization and the Indian Institute of Management, Lucknow for instituting National Leadership Awards in three major categories namely, Business, Science & Technology and Community Service & Social Upliftment.
I have had the pleasure of bestowing these awards in the past and I am quite aware of the due diligence exercised in selecting the winners.
They are role models for all Indians, especially the younger generation who would be enthused to follow in their footsteps.
Lala Lakshmipat Singhania, in whose honour this Award has been instituted, was a visionary and a business leader of outstanding qualities.
We have witnessed tangible changes in almost every sphere of our lives.
Growth has to be truly inclusive for it to be meaningful.
We must keep in mind that even after seven decades of planned economic growth, disparities still abound across regions, states and social groups.
These only serve to remind us that our policies, developmental paradigms and delivery mechanisms need to be made even more broad-based and effective.
There can be no second opinion on the critical role that education plays in the development of a nation.
It is one of the most powerful tools that can initiate societal changes and transform the economic fortunes of a country.
Institutions like IIM Lucknow have played a pivotal role and companies like the JK Organisation have supported their initiatives through instituting awards like this.
I congratulate both of them.
Some of the top universities of the world have been built on the initiative of the private sector.
Let us hope that in the future, we will see even greater progress so as to make our educational system one of the greatest in the world.
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
Your Excellency Mahmoud Abbas, President of the State of Palestine,
Distinguished guests,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is with great pleasure that I extend a very warm welcome to you, Mr. President and the distinguished members of your delegation.
Excellency, I recall, with pleasure, my own visit to your beautiful country in October, 2015.
The warmth of the friendly people of Palestine throughout my visit has made a lasting impression on me.
I am happy that your State Visit has given me the opportunity of receiving you once again in the Rashtrapati Bhavan.
Over the years, our bilateral relationship has expanded - to encompass many more areas of common interest.
India remains firmly committed to assist the Palestinian people in achieving their developmental goals.
Consistent with these efforts, India has expressed support for the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road Map.
We have persistently advocated for the implementation of relevant resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly and its Security Council.
We were happy to have participated in the Middle East Peace Process Conference held in Paris in January, 2017.
Now, we earnestly hope for early resumption of talks between Palestine and Israel leading to the establishment of an independent and sovereign State of Palestine.
We wish that the creation of a Palestinian State - that is a full member of the comity of nations, becomes your lasting personal legacy to your people.
I am glad to note that most of the projects announced during my State Visit to Palestine are making good progress.
Mr. President, both our Governments recognize the indispensability of investing in human resources for building the strong foundation of a modern nation.
My Government is pleased to have hosted over 700 Palestinian nationals in training programmes offered under the Indian Technical and Economic Co-operation programme.
Going forward, it is a matter of satisfaction that our Governments have agreed to intensify our mutual co-operation in the fields of security, information and communications technology, agriculture, education, culture, healthcare and sports.
The youth exchange programme initiated by our Governments will help in forging a partnership between our future leaders for enhancing the mutual understanding between our peoples.
Excellency, this is a time of unprecedented global challenges.
The scourge of terrorism is, unfortunately, one of the biggest threats faced by the international community.
India believes that there can be no justification, whatsoever for terrorism.
Its use as an instrument of state policy is perilous and reprehensible.
We believe that closer co-ordination and concerted efforts by the international community are necessary to tackle this menace effectively.
With these few words, Mr. President, I once again welcome you and wish you a very successful visit to India.
to the health and well-being of President Abbas;
to the enduring friendship between India and Palestine and;
to peace in this region and the continued progress and prosperity of the people of the State of Palestine.
We served together in the Rajya Sabha in the 1970s.
Later, while he was Chief Minister of Rajasthan, I was Vice Chairman of the Planning Commission, I had opportunity to see his extensive knowledge about problems being faced by citizens of Rajasthan, and his will to eradicate these day to day problems.
I was deeply impressed by his commitment to the downtrodden and poor.
He was a member of the Rajasthan Legislative Assembly for over a period of forty five years beginning 1952 and also a member of the Rajya Sabha for about three years.
He served as the Chief Minister of Rajasthan for three terms and also held the office of the Leader of the Opposition of the Rajasthan Legislative Assembly.
He was elected to the august office of the Vice-President of the country in August 2002 and served till July 2007.
As ex-officio Chairman, Rajya Sabha he conducted the proceedings of the Upper House with great distinction and added grace and elegance to the office.
Besides holding these high offices, Shri Shekhawatji was associated with several welfare projects which touched the lives of ordinary citizens.
Today, his rich legacy remains with us and he is fondly remembered as a sagacious statesman, a distinguished legislator and a committed votary of humanitarian values.
The rulers of ancient India were bound byDharma, which was akin to the rule of law, constitutionalism or limited government.
TheRigveda and theAtharvaveda make mention ofSabha (General Assembly) andSamiti (House of Elders).
This Act is also said to have started the process of territorial integration and administrative centralization in India.
It accorded supremacy to the Presidency of Bengal and the Governor of Bengal was appointed as the Governor-General.
A Council consisting of four members was constituted to assist the Governor-General.
The Governor-General of Bengal was, thereafter, designated as the Governor General ofIndiaand empowered to administer the whole ofBritish India.
This Act set up one legislative council for all the British territories in India and introduced an element of institutional specialization by differentiating the law-making meetings of the Council from its executive meetings.
Legislative functions of the state was thus for the first time separated from its executive functions.
It was perhaps for the first time that Indian opinion was being expressed on the subject of legislative reforms.
Bills passed through the usual three stages and were referred to Select Committees.
Legislative business was conducted in public instead of in secret and reports of proceedings were officially published.
Standing orders were adopted to conduct and regulate proceedings.
The new Council conceived its duties not to be confined only to legislation but also began to assume the character of a miniature representative assembly, assembled for the purpose of enquiry into and redress of grievances.
Shri Prasanna Kumar Tagore was appointed to the post of Clerk of the Council and he went on to provide the Council with a parliamentary form of procedure and encouraged it to assert its independence as a separate organ of government.
Public were allowed to witness the proceedings of the Council and press reporting was permitted in 1856.
Despite the progressive establishment of legislative practices and procedures, there was, however, no Indian participation in the Council.
Most of them were ruling princes or chiefs and rich zamindar families.
During the Viceroyalty of Lord Rippon, Durga Charan Law, a merchant, Raja Shiva Prasad, an Inspector of Schools and Syed Ameer Ali, a Presidency Magistrate were nominated.
Editor of the Hindoo Patriot, Kristodas Pal recommended by the British Indian Association and after his death Peare Mohan Mukherjee were also nominated to the Council by Lord Rippon.
They remained docile and presented little opposition to the Government.
There remained at the same time strong opposition to Indian involvement in the Councils on the part of many Englishmen.
Surendranath Banerjee and Ananda Mohan Bose were its leading organizers.
Bose depicted this conference as the first stage towards the formation of a National Indian Parliament.
The Conference demanded introduction of representative assemblies for the advancement of the people of India.
The National Conference was in many ways the precursor of the Indian National Congress.
At its very first session, the Congress passed a resolution asking for constitutional reforms and for the admission of a considerable proportion of elected members to the Legislative Councils and the right to discuss the budget.
Delivering his Presidential Address at the first session in Kolkata, W.C. Banerjee described the Congress as the National Assembly of India.
The Congress considered the reform of the Councils at the root of all other reforms.
The Council had no right to vote on the Budget.
Members of the Council however still had no powers to submit or propose any resolution or to divide the Council in respect of any financial discussion.
The first question was asked on 16 February 1893.
Congress veteran Sir Pherozeshah Mehta, the first elected Indian Member was frank, bold and vigorous in his criticism of government policies.
In order to stem the growth of the nationalist movement in India, Lord Lytton decided to censor the vernacular press.
Pherozeshah Mehta vehemently opposed the move.
He believed that the press should be as free as possible, and that it was the fundamental duty of the government to educate the masses.
Thereremained an official majority in the Councils.
The Government could always pass Bills disregarding opposition by Indian members.
The vehement criticism by Indian members proved ineffective in preventing the Government from following a policy of repression, large scale imprisonments, deportations etc.
Elected members were to be returned by constituencies, such as municipalities, district and local boards, universities, chambers of commerce and trade associations and groups of persons such as land-holders or tea planters.
The constituencies were small, the largest of them comprising only 650 persons.
Out of 27 elected members in the Central Council, only 9 were supposed to represent the people of India as a whole.
It is this Act which regrettably introduced for the first time the principle of communal representation in India and created separate electorates.
This was the beginning of non-official resolutions.
The first resolution under the rules was moved on 25 February 1910 by Gopal Krishna Gokhale recommending prohibition of indentured labour for Natal in South Africa.
Similarly, on Indemnity Bill he spoke for four hours continuously and in all, he spent six and a half hours speaking on the Bill.
It was very rare that non-official members could have their way.
Still, they made their presence felt by moving amendments, resolutions and asking questions.
The Budget was considered in two stages.
The presentation of a preliminary budget called the financial statement was followed by a general discussion.
Some items of expenditure such as that of the Army were however treated as non votable.
These were met with bitter and prolonged opposition both inside and outside the Legislature.
Debatewent on for eight hours extending over two days in which as many as 20 non official members took part.
The Indian members opposed the Bill not only at the introduction stage but at every stage.
On all occasions, Indian membersvoted solidly together.
Some members such as Malaviya and Sukul resigned their membership of the Council in protest.
This system establisheda dual form of government in each province.
The lower house was the Legislative Assembly of 144 members, of which104 were elected and 40 were nominated with tenure of three years.
These leaders disagreed with the Congress policy ofnon-cooperation withthe Governmenton the matter of entry into the Council.
He excelled himself in the question hour and became a master of the art of interpellation.
When the time came for elections to the Madras Legislative Council, Gandhiji declared that it was enoughif one Satyamurti was sent to the Legislatures.
Shri Satyamurti was member of the Central Legislative Assembly from 1935 to 1939 wherehis success as a legislator led Gandhiji to remark that if there had been ten Satyamurtis in our legislatures, the British would have quit long ago.
At the same time, Pandit Motilal Nehru as leader of the Swarajya Party in Central Council laid the basic foundation of constitutional government inIndia.
Both Motilal and Chittaranjan were able to keep the Muslims with the Swarajya Party to project a united India.
The 1935 Act for the first time provided for a federal system which would consist of not only the Governors' Provinces of British India but also the Chief Commissioners' provinces and the princely states.
It finally sought to break up the unitary system under which British India had hitherto been administered.
The principle of the constitution of 1919 had been decentralization rather than federation.
Under the new Act the Provinces were for the first time recognized in law as separate entities, exercising executive and legislative powers in their own field, in their own right, free in normal circumstances from Central control, in that field.
The members of the Constituent Assembly were chosen through indirect election by the members of the Provincial Legislative Assemblies.
The two functions of the Constituent Assembly, that is Constitution-making and Legislation, were clearly separated and the Constituent Assembly (Legislative) commenced functioning from 17 November 1947.
It is to underline the fact that if prominent legislators of pre-independence days with limited powers, could have done so much, how much more can be done by our MPs, MLAs and MLCs of today.
The job of a legislator is a 24x7 responsibility.
Legislators must at all times be sensitive and responsive to the problems and concerns of the people.
They must give voice to the grievances of the publicby raising them on the floor of the Legislature and act as the link between the people and the Government.
It is most unfortunate that time devoted towards legislation has been gradually declining in our Parliament.
To illustrate, the first Lok Sabha from 1952-57 had 677 sittings in which 319 bills were passed.
In comparison, the fourteenth Lok Sabha from 2004-2009 had 332 sittings and passed just 247 bills.
The fifteenth Lok Sabha had 357 sittings and passed 181 bills while the sixteenth Lok Sabha has had 197 sittings and passed only 111 bills (upto the 10thsession).
9.95% of total time was lost due to interruptions in the Tenth Lok Sabha, 5.28% in the Eleventh Lok Sabha, 11.93% in the Twelfth Lok Sabha, 18.95% in the Thirteenth Lok Sabha, 19.58% in the Fourteenth Lok Sabha, a shocking 41.6% in the Fifteenth Lok Sabha and about 16% in the Sixteenth Lok Sabha (upto the 10thsession).
The odds were stacked high against its political consolidation as civil strife on grounds of religious identity tore society apart at Partition.
But, our critics have been proved completely wrong.
The institutional efficacy of these democratic institutions is beyond doubt.
Today, the developing world looks up to India with admiration and rightly so, as India successfully treads the difficult path of democratic governance with a billion-plus people.
A substantial section of our society still remains untouched by the lofty ideals and objectives of our governance.
It is only when we succeed in making a positive impact upon the lives of those sections of people, can we claim that the democratic system of governance we adopted has become relevant for all our people.
I request the State Government of Rajasthan Government to do its best to carry forward the life, beliefs, memories and legacy of Shri Shekhawat.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Their contribution is central to its success.
In a developing economy such as ours, nurses and midwives are crucial in delivering cost-effective and, at the same time, good quality healthcare.
Our country needs to respond swiftly to healthcare challenges that keep coming up.
I am glad to see that the National Health Policy, 2017 envisages a new momentum in innovation and nursing.
The complexity of medical and healthcare practices today demands that nurses are fully involved in the planning, implementation, research and evaluation that goes into the successful delivery of patient care.
These functions come with responsibilities and accountability.
Indeed, the fact that, the Academy is one of the premier institutions of higher education in the field of forestry, goes a long way in testifying its core-competency.
Ladies & Gentlemen,
While our forests provide for water, clean oxygen and various herbal plants, our wildlife sustains that very essential food chain, that is essential for maintenance of ecology.
Friends,
This thought takes back even to the times of Chandragupta Maurya.
Friends,
The Forest Policy of the year 1952, calls for maintaining one third of the total land of the country as forest cover.
This clearly indicates a gap of about 15%, which has to be bridged.
While this is a tremendous achievement in itself, but yet there are many more miles to be covered.
Friends,
Its impact on the poor, due to their limited capacity to cope with it, assumes paramount significance.
Since forests are known to moderate local climate effects, protecting people from natural disasters, in addition to providing supplementary income to local population, your job should be to preserve these effective tools to counter climate change.
Efficiency and efficacy should be the corner stone in the discharge of your responsibilities.
When people come to you with a problem, you should put in your best efforts to solve their issues in a professional manner.
Governance with a human face and efficiency should be the hallmark of an All India Service, like yours.
This would be possible by upgrading your technical skill sets and revisiting the laid down procedures followed by your subordinate staff so as to find scope for improvement by using appropriate technology.
I am confident that your training in IGNFA would have given you ample exposure to understand cross-sectoral linkages so that means could be devised to harness synergy in the delivery of services.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Thank you,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a privilege to welcome you all this evening.
The warmth of the friendly people of Turkey throughout my visit is still fresh in my mind.
Ladies and gentlemen,
The relationship between India and Turkey pre-dates the establishment of our diplomatic ties as two modern and independent nations.
Down the centuries and through our shared history, it has evolved and deepened.
The Turkish contribution to Indian art and architecture, our language, the political and military organizational structure that was developed in our country, some of our laws, our costumes, customs and cuisine, is substantial.
Excellency,
We all remember the mission of Dr. Mukhtar Ahmed Ansari to Turkey in 1912 which he undertook to render medical assistance during the Balkan War.
Trade between our two countries has increased manifold since your last visit to India in 2008.
This should motivate us to take further steps to enhance bilateral flows of goods and services as well as investments.
Excellency, this is a time of unprecedented global challenges.
The scourge of terrorism, a reality of our times, has afflicted India and Turkey for decades.
India believes that there can be no justification, whatsoever for terrorism.
Its use as an instrument of state policy is perilous and reprehensible.
We believe that closer co-ordination and concerted efforts by the international community are necessary to tackle this menace effectively.
Another global challenge of unprecedented scale is the impact of climate change.
There is an urgent need for the world to use science, technology and best practices to achieve the agreed targets so that we can honestly claim to have made the world a better place to live in.
Please accept the best wishes of the people of India for the continued progress and prosperity of the friendly people of Turkey.
I wish you and Madam Emine Erdogan a comfortable and safe flight home.
Thank you.
Your Excellency, Mr.Nicos Anastasiades, President of theRepublic of Cyprus,
Distinguished members of the Cypriot delegation,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a great pleasure to welcome you, Mr. President and the distinguished members of your delegation on your first State Visit to India.
As young nations that are simultaneously ancient civilizations, we enjoy, today, a bilateral discourse that is historic, broad-based and multi-dimensional, based on our long-standing economic and cultural exchanges.
Excellency,
As modern, independent and democratic nations with many shared values, India and Cyprus have many convergences on regional and global issues.
We have been working welltogether to achievecommon objectivesin variousinternational fora.
India appreciates the consistent support of Cyprus for her legitimate claim to permanent membership of a reformed UN Security Council.
Having suffered invasions, occupation, conflict and adversity throughout our history, we both desire peace and stability for our respective peoples to achieve their developmental aspirations.
Our information technology sector as also our renewable energy, natural gas and hydrocarbons, sustainable tourism, infrastructure and health and wellness sectors are open for partnerships and foreign investment.
The recent signing of the revised Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement is a good step in this direction.
It is a young university although with a rich history of teaching and teacher training since its inception as the Central Institute of English, which was established as part of the vision of our first Prime Minister, Pandit Nehru for new India in 1958 and later as Central Institute of English and Foreign Languages in 1972.
It is indeed a matter of satisfaction that it has been dedicated to finding solutions to big challenges in language education and preparing students for leadership in a complex world.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It should be possible to develop educational packages from school to University level for training and for collaborative teaching and research.
I am told that in this regard centres for English Language training have been set up in ASEAN countries and five new centres are coming up in African countries.
To my mind, knowledge must pave the path of life; and living must essentially encompass pursuit of the path of learning.
From times immemorial the continent of Asia, and South East Asia in particular, opened up novel paths of learning.
Nalanda, after Takshashila, held the beacon of light very high for over a millennium across lands and seas and welcomed drifting seekers of knowledge and provided them a lasting resting place.
Challenges exist for such institutions, both from outside and inside.
Administrative strength and sensitivity removes hurdles in the path of learning, and allows academics to thrive, as this University has displayed.
Friends,
Any institutional future is dependent upon enabling the faculty, students and the staff to overcome cynicism.
One way of achieving this is making everyone a stakeholder in collaborative institution-building.
Immersive teaching supplemented by intensive research alone can advance the vision of the University in generating new knowledge and sharing it with everyone.
This shloka should be the driving impulse of any conception of education in any period or place.
Kennedy inspired graduates to strive for the one of the biggest goal: that is world peace.
I wish them Godspeed and all success in their future endeavours.
Thank you.
I take this opportunity to congratulate degree holders and award winners for their hard work and toil over the years.
It recognizes their hard work.
Dear students, when you leave the portals of your alma mater, you may feel a little nervous as you would no longer have the support of your guides and friends.
But, you have no reason to be nervous, since I know that the skills you have acquired will help you in facing all troubles and challenges.
I wish you all success.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This, it has been able to do so without losing sight of its local ethos, is a notable achievement.
To my mind, it is a model worth emulating for any knowledge hub set in a distinctive environment.
It is a shining example of our cultural pluralism and co-existence, and a symbol of a Cosmopolitanism which is essential for a modernizing society.
In ancient times, India was the leader in education.
Friends:
It has made the knowledge and wisdom of these experts available to the students as well as members of the public.
I wish the programme great success in the years ahead.
I was also happy to see that girl students outshone the boys when prizes were being distributed.
It is important that young women particularly those belonging to marginal sections gain increased access to the portals of colleges and universities.
It is rightly said that if we educate a man, we educate an individual but if we educate a women, we educate an entire family.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We are in the midst of global changes that are both complex and unpredictable.
Indian expertise and talent has much demand worldwide.
The prospects in a liberal economic environment are immense.
Yet, to take advantage of the unfolding opportunities in a globalized market, we have to galvanize our demographic strength.
For that, we need to provide sound training to our youth to build capacity for undertaking skilled work.
It will help prepare them for challenging job roles in the global economic community.
For, lot of ideas capable of making an impact transmits faster than ever before today.
It will require a new paradigm of partnership between the various stakeholders such as industry, voluntary sector, central and state agencies.
All stakeholders have to be involved in these efforts.
This will call for adoption of global best practices for world-class academic management.
Our institutions have to work relentlessly towards excellence.
They have to provide the best of amenities to their academic community.
Models of teaching have to be adaptive to the latest trends and also the changing learner profile.
There has to be an alliance between the IT-enabled platforms like MOOCs and knowledge networks, and pedagogy.
As concepts and understanding evolve, our faculty has to be better prepared with up-dated knowledge.
A strong research eco-system has to be built on the plank of institutional collaborations, research parks, and talented researchers.
There also have to be close link between Indian universities and industries.
Dear friends:
A mechanism is needed in our higher education system that promotes competitiveness.
NIRF is a valuable initiative, and I am sure, with greater and more involved participation, this indicator will provide impetus to our institutions to do better in the coming years.
They have to carry out their responsibilities as a social entity.
A strong connection with the society will provide the edifice for value-oriented learning in them.
This will instill in the students a sensitivity that will inspire them to search for solutions to vexed socio-economic problems in the environment in which they are living.
The onus is on our institutions to produce men and women of substance and character, not merely competent professionals.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Many of them were accepted.
University Grant Commission was established.
Over the years, many recommendations bore good results.
They are relevant even today.
The learning environment in our educational institutions should nurture scholarship in the students in a way that the aspirations of their self, family, society, nation and the world are met with a seamless endeavour.
It should facilitate the acquisition of greater knowledge and the application of that knowledge in solving the riddles facing our times like environmental degradation, resource conflict and identity crisis.
Friends:
I am confident that the graduates and researchers who will leave the portals of this august institution after obtaining their degrees today will contribute brilliantly to realize the potential of this nation.
Go ahead.
Whole world is yours.
Be confident and you will able to conquer the world.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
President of Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The close bonds of kinship and cooperation between India and Nepal are defined by our geography and enriched by our common culture and history.
Our age-old fraternal relations have been nurtured by successive Governments and leaders in both India and Nepal into a dynamic and enriching partnership.
Excellency,
India has an abiding interest in the socio-economic development of Nepal.
We believe that the prosperity, security and welfare of our two nations are inter-linked and inter-dependent.
India is committed to extending all possible support in accordance with the priorities of the people and Government of Nepal.
Today, as democratic and pluralistic nations, both India and Nepal aspire for a higher growth rate, an inclusive society, sustainable development and an external environment that facilitates our national development.
Both our peoples are opposed to the menace of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Development and progress is what is of utmost importance to us.
Towards our common goals, we have been co-operating closely, to very successful outcomes.
Nepal is passing through a crucial phase in its quest for peace, stability, and multi-party democracy with the aim of consolidating the gains of democracy and achieving economic prosperity.
India lauds the enterprise and achievements of the people of Nepal.
Their wisdom and resilience will, no doubt, succeed in forging consensus through dialogue and understanding - so as to achieve their objectives within a federal and democratic framework, taking all sections of their society on board.
We wish the people of Nepal every success in this noble endeavour.
Excellency,
Today, as India witnesses a dramatic economic transformation, it presents unprecedented opportunities to investors and partners in all sectors.
We welcome the people of Nepal to take full advantage of these.
We are happy to note the increasing exchanges of businessmen, industrialists and investors as well as students, scholars and academicians - and enhanced levels of tourist flows between our two countries.
Your visit, Madame President, has provided us an opportunity to reaffirm our special relationship and to identify ways and means of further enriching our multifaceted partnership.
With these words, Ladies and Gentlemen,
May I invite you to join me in raising a toast
- to the good health and personal well-being of Her Excellency, the President of Nepal;
- to the continued progress and prosperity of the friendly people of Nepal; and,
- to successful co-operation and enduring friendship between India and Nepal.
It is indeed a privilege for me to be present at the Inaugural Session of the 3rdGlobal Exhibition on Services.
I compliment the Department of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, along with the Confederation of Indian Industry and the Services Export Promotion Council, for developing this powerful business platform aimed at deepening engagement of the international community in the global services export domain.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The services sector also contributes significantly to trade in goods including through supply chains and e-commerce.
At a time when global merchandise trade is slowing down, trade in services can bring new benefits to the global economy even as technology, connectivity and knowledge drive its growth.
A country which can place 104 satellites in space from a single launch vehicle, provide successful medical surgeries at a fraction of the cost in advanced nations, win global awards for creativity in advertising, and emerge as the largest film producer in the world, has the potential to offer immense value to international services consumers across a spectrum of areas.
While India has emerged as the fastest growing large economy in the world, its services sector outpaces its GDP growth rate and has been its key growth driver.
Make in India targets the creation of an advanced manufacturing base, increasingly built on embedded services such as R&D and design, retail and marketing, and logistics.
The Digital India campaign serves to connect all remote corners of the country through efficient digital infrastructure, while also increasing manufacturing of electronics and offering key public services online.
With digital infrastructure in place, technology will reach down to the farthest hamlets, placing markets at the fingertips of citizens and driving services growth.
Startup India and Skill India enhance the capabilities of our youth for livelihood opportunities, both as job providers and job seekers in the services markets.
The Jan Dhan Yojana for financial inclusion and the strong push for fintech to propel less use of cash in the economy are shaping a new services dimension in the country and boosting sectors such as banking and finance, cyber security and e-commerce.
Many of these services can be delivered from India to offshore locations, helping large cities manage their facilities optimally, facilitating hospitals in maintaining medical records or providing geospatial information.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The global services trade is far less than the global merchandise trade; however, it has an equal potential given that most economies today are dominated by services sectors in terms of output and employment.
Global services trade is, however, challenged by multiple issues relating to legal, economic and political spheres.
Encouraging greater trade in services globally requires us to address policy matters such as access and facilitation through trade negotiations, transparency, dispute resolution and capacity building.
Recognizing the overwhelming role of services trade in the overall trade agenda, India has acted to evolve solutions for resolving barriers to trade.
Accordingly, in March this year, India tabled a paper at the WTO on trade facilitation in services to increase the volume of trade in the sector.
Exchange of services represents the way forward for global trade.
I am sure that the outcomes of the GES would reverberate positively into the future.
I wish you all an engaging and productive interaction and Godspeed in your endeavors.
Thank you
Jai Hind!
The National Geoscience Awards, instituted by the Ministry of Mines, is a laudable initiative to honour the contributions and years of dedicated work of geo-scientists.
Over the last five decades, these Awards have emerged as the most coveted recognition in the field of geosciences.
They have encouraged scientists to achieve higher levels of excellence.
It is a pointer to the fact that geoscience today is being pursued with earnest fervour and commitment across the nation.
The high standards of research, I hope, will be carried forward by the future generation of scientists.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The rapid strides taken by our nation has increased the expectations for enhanced growth and development.
In this context, the mining and mineral sector has huge potential as one of the most promising contributors in the continued growth of the country.
The government has introduced major reforms through the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act 2015.
They are aimed at ensuring larger benefits for the states with transparency being the core objective.
A National Mineral Exploration Trust has been established by the Ministry to promote mineral exploration through wider participation of exploration agencies.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have to nurture with care our Mother Earth as she has been supporting life on earth through the geologic ages.
With this, we have reached a critical threshold of environmental vulnerability.
In a scenario such as this, geo-scientists have a central role to play.
Geoscientists have developed for themselves a unique perspective about the structure and the evolution of earth through the geological ages.
They have deep knowledge of the processes that formed the rivers, oceans, mountains and other diverse landforms.
Geo-scientists can help provide solutions for maintaining growth without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own requirements.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This discipline carries a wide import in the mitigation of natural and man-made hazards; provision of solutions to the impacts of climate change, and the management of fast depleting water resources.
Today, the globe is in need of geoscientists much more than before.
In this model, growth and development depends not only on the availability of mineral resources but also on their judicious exploitation.
The near surface mineral deposits are depleting very fast.
Hence, the geo-scientific community has to step up to meet the demand for future resources by finding deeper sources for the minerals we require.
Special emphasis also has to be given for discovery of strategic and critical minerals to make the nation self reliant and reduce dependence on imports from external sources for our strategic needs.
While addressing the resource needs of the country, we have to also keep in mind the off-shore regions which hold enormous potential for phosphorites, gas hydrates and seafloor massive sulphides.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In that same vein, geoscience transcends the borders of diverse scientific disciplines.
We in general and geo-scientists in particular have to join hands at the national and international levels and across disciplines to evolve converging ideas that will ensure a better tomorrow.
I am sure that such rich tradition of research will be taken to new heights in the coming years.Narmada Man
Dedicated groups of scholars are carrying out studies on theCritical Zone, to develop an understanding of the role and interplay of the water, soil, rock, air, and biota in the near surface environment of the earth.
Indian geoscientists have to face the challenges that these new fields offer and foray with rigour and confidence into the unknown.AnthropoceneCritical Zone
Dear Awardees:
You have to engage yourselves with renewed vigour to better the high standards of achievement you have set for yourselves.
At the same time, it has become your responsibility to disseminate your knowledge among your peer group and younger generation in the best interest of geoscience.
May this be the beginning of a new journey for you, a quest for conquering new horizons!
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I am happy today to be a part of the digital payment movement that India has embarked upon.
I congratulate each one of you who has contributed in this mission to make India a less cash society.
This will help ensure financial inclusion where every Indian, irrespective of her socio-economic status, is empowered with necessary digital tools to participate in the new age economy.
On this occasion, I will also like to recognize the efforts of all citizens who have participated in this digital payment mission.
Presently, we remain primarily a cash based economy with about 95% of the personal consumption and 86% of all transactions being in cash.
The initiatives of the Government are a good beginning and we need to sustain and nurture these with active participation from all segments of the society.
It is necessary to reduce cash in circulation and impart greater urgency to promoting secure digital payment methods to ensure greater transparency.
More than one billion Indians have a unique identity number with a biometric identifier which is unique in its own way.
Even countries which are technologically far more advanced than India with comparatively much smaller size population do not have such a system in place.
Thank you.
Some time ago, the entire world made a commitment in the form of Sustainable Development Goals in which mental health and well-being figure prominently.
With these, we have committed ourselves to achieve quantified targets by 2030.
Looking at the scale of the problem and limited time available, our task is indeed quite challenging.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Lack of mental well-being contributes significantly to the total disability and morbidity burden across the world.
Productivity of human beings, whether in workforce or in family situations, gets reduced significantly if one has any mental disorder.
Mental health disorders span a very wide range from simple disorders to very complex situations.
It is often seen that simpler disorders, if not managed in time, tend to become more complex putting the patient at higher risk of morbidity.
Out of all the mental health disorders, depression is probably the most common.
Depression affects people of all ages from all walks of life and in all countries.
The social stigma attached to a mental disorder, even if it is easily treatable, is also a major problem in India.
However, people have now started talking about this issue leading to greater awareness in this respect.
I would like to point out that traditional Indian values along with our family system, can be good mechanisms to support those who suffer from mental health disorders.
I would like to urge medical practitioners here to focus on the social support systems, spiritual beliefs and practices as well as the system of Yoga in their quest for providing well-being to all.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
There is a severe shortage of mental health professionals in India and this service gap can be bridged effectively by telemedicine.
I am happy to know that the International Society for Telemedicine and e-Health, USA has now recognized Telemedicine Society of India as the official National society presenting telemedicine activities in India.
Telepsychiatry will help in reducing the mortality rate considerably, with the advent of mobile apps which are being developed.
I have no doubt that, Telemedicine will play a very important role in saving the lives of our Army jawans and provide them advance updates on health related issues.
Telemedicine is well suited for Armed Forces and will significantly improve the health care delivery system.
I am glad that the organizers of this World Health Day Summit have planned strategic follow up conclaves in different cities of the world to create a broad framework for collective action.
I appeal to all of you, to THINK GLOBALLY and ACT LOCALLY.
I am indeed happy to have conferred the NIMCARE Life Time Achievement Award on Dr. N M Veeraiyan, Chancellor, Saveetha University, Chennai who has transformed Saveetha University into one of the leading universities in the country through his dedication, commitment and hard work.
Before I conclude, I applaud the efforts of Dr Vijay G Prabhakar a renowned public health practitioner from Chicago, USA for taking this initiative to conduct the first NIMCARE World Health Summit here in India and also congratulate the co-host organisations who have united with NIMCARE to form a broad framework to create awareness about depression and combating it.
I welcome the co-host organisations from overseas to this Summit.
Let us strive to make even greater progress in our efforts to create awareness about depression and focus on further strengthening our health care delivery systems.
I am confident that this NIMCARE World Health Day Summit will provide all of you an opportunity to get inspired, challenged and make meaningful partnerships for your continued growth.
I hope all the participants here go back better equipped to handle mental health care situations that warrant urgent attention.
Let us all unite for addressing the issue of mental health care and to prevent and combat depression.
I wish you Godspeed and success in all your endeavours.
Thank You.
Jai Hind.
Dear Friends,
I have always held that India will grow when whole of India grows.
With 68 percent of our population still living invillages in the rural areas, smart development can take place only if villages and villagers become smart.
Our new Gandhian model is an effort to develop a policy paradigm based on convergence of resources of both the Central and State governments, PRIs, Public and Private sector organizations, NGOs and enlightened citizens to make our villages economically vibrant, socially harmonious and to the extent possible, self-reliant.
It must have the required basic physical and social infrastructure with a layer of smart information and communication embedded in the infrastructure to improve governance and delivery of services, livelihood and economic opportunities.
I am grateful to the government of Haryana for their immediate acceptance and proactive support to our SMARTGRAM project.
Under this Initiative, we are working in the fields of Infrastructure Development, Health and Wellness, Education, Agriculture, Energy and Skill Development and Entrepreneurship and have so far made substantial progress.
The five villages today have 24X7 electricity, Common Service Centers, Training Centers and medical clinics and wellness centres.
So far, more than 30 organizations have joined the SMARTGRAM consortium.
These include, government organizations, public, private and philanthropic organizations, academic institutions and of course the villagers themselves.
Involvement of so many actors from various fields has led to development of a model where the schemes of the Central Government, State Government, efforts of academic institutions, Panchayati Raj Institutions and private Individuals have converged to bring synergy in the development of rural areas.
I thank all the organizations and Institutions partnering with us for their support.
Encouraged by our early successes, we have expanded the project from 5 to 50 villages in the region in the month of February this year.
I am confident of expanding this project to 100 villages by the end of May 2017.
Dear Friends,
I must appreciate the work being done by NSDC and NIFTEM in the field of Skill development.
I am told that close to 1200 persons have been trained in close to 15 trades out of which a large number have got placement too.
Some of the entrepreneurs trained and supported by NIFTEM have started their own enterprises and many more are in the process of doing so.
I wish all of them great success in their future endeavours.
I am happy that Bhartiya Yuva Shakti Trust, chaired by Shri Rahul Bajaj has partnered our SMARTGRAM project and has agreed to provide mentoring support to the potential entrepreneurs.
A Mentor has to handhold the budding entrepreneur at almost each step and give him the confidence to stand on his own.
We must aim to develop at least 5 entrepreneurs from each village who will create jobs for others in the vicinity.
Migration of village youth to the cities can be tackled by creating job opportunities in the villages through enterprises based on village resources, agriculture and farm based products.
Organization of Business Idea Contest in the SMARTGRAMs and in Gurgaon was a novel idea.
I congratulate the winners of the contest and wish them all the best for their journey to become successful entrepreneurs.
Dear Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Thank you
We, in India acknowledge, remember and celebrate our women in many ways in our everyday life.
They have distinguished themselves in taking up challenges and realizing high aspirations that they represent.
Behind each success is a story of tremendous commitment and perseverance.
Each accomplishment represents the sincere efforts of thousands of other women and these are to be equally respected.
Our Constitution and the Directive Principles enshrined therein have given our Governments clear guidelines for policy and planning.
Our successes have helped our society to evolve in its unique way.
Women are no longer seen as mere recipients of welfare benefits but are recognized as holders of equal rights, equal partners and agents of change in the social, economic, cultural and political processes of the country.
Ladies and gentlemen,
She should feel confident that she can achieve her highest aspirations in whichever field she chooses.
It is designed to also motivate girl children in every part of our country to enroll in primary education.
It is inexcusable that women in India do not feel as secure and safe as they should.
Gender biases have no place in modern India where inclusive development is a key objective.
A greater emphasis on early sensitization of children and youth in schools and institutions of higher learning would help inculcate due respect for the female gender.
This should be taken up through appropriate measures in our rural and urban populations and through well-conceived and coherent Government programmes.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
From their families and homes to farms and fields and in their businesses and professions, women are second to none in applying themselves with a commitment that comes from the heart and soul.
Thank You.
Good evening, ladies and gentlemen!
I have had the benefit to listen to Dr. Francis Gurry, Director General of WIPO, and Dr. R.A. Mashelkar, Chairperson of NIF, today.
I am thankful to both of them for sharing their knowledge and insights on this relevant theme of inclusive innovations.
This topic, to my mind, is pertinent for any nation pursuing an inclusive development agenda.
The preamble to our constitution proclaims to secure to the citizens: JUSTICE, social, economic and political; LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and FRATERNITY to assure the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the nation.
Development is real when it is inclusive; when the last person feels being a part of the narrative of progress.
While I am optimistic about the prospects of inclusive innovation in our country, I do have a few concerns, which I want to share on this platform.
Without a strong foundation of education, ability of communities to benefit from other infrastructural resources for development remains limited.
I am told that NIF has scouted thousands of innovators and traditional knowledge holders, many of whom did not allow lack of education to come in their way of innovating new solutions.
Undoubtedly, with better tools and better access to education, they may have done even better.
We need to bring an empathetic stress on inclusive innovation in our learning modules in education.
These clubs search for inclusive innovations in the hinterland of their institutions; spread the innovations developed; invite innovators to classrooms or labs to understand their motivation, and identify unmet needs of society and try to address them through their projects.
Seeing their innovations make me hopeful that in the near future, we will be able to make the life of people, especially the disadvantaged sections, more comfortable.
Ladies and gentlemen:
Helping fishermen in high seas, farmers through weather forecasts and students through dissemination of educational content has been made possible through space technology applications at grassroots level.
Early investment in science and technology has given us rich dividends.
We need to continue providing impetus to science education and research in our institutions.
The INSPIRE-MANAK programme of the Department of Science and Technology envisages the mobilization of one million ideas from half a million schools at the rate of two ideas per school.
This initiative will help build a spirit of creativity and ingenuity amongst the young students.
Friends:
I am told that many public-sector scientists do not charge any cost for the time used in validating and value-adding grassroots innovations.
Many intellectual property firms also do the same.
Let me compliment them for their service, which has helped in harnessing IPR support for local communities and grassroots innovators.
The concept of Technology Commons used by NIF allowing fellow community members to use innovative ideas of others for non-commercial purposes has also helped in wider dissemination of innovations.
For that, a strong environment for starting new enterprises is necessary.
Micro-venture finance and not just micro finance will help usher in entrepreneurial undertakings at the grassroots.
The Atal Innovation Mission has started tinkering labs in schools.
Many incubators have been set up by government departments such as science and technology, and bio-technology.
This would enable young people to stay with families back home in villages and small towns, and still pursue their entrepreneurial aspirations.in situ
However, we should expand the opportunities for students to start new technology and social innovation based inclusive businesses.
Ladies and gentlemen:
This is a form of participative governance.
I see this as a healthy trend.
It provides clues about how to make public services more responsive to the rising aspirations of our people.
We should not let scale become an impediment to sustainability.
I thank all the delegates once again.
I hope you have the time to visit the blooming Mughal Gardens while you are here.
Thank you.
At the outset, let me congratulate the award winners for their contribution in the sphere of innovation.
Behind their beaming faces, which I can see, lie their hard work and perseverance.
I am told that more than 33,000 entries were received out of which 32 innovators have been chosen and bestowed with national and state awards today.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This has strengthened the resolve of the government to encourage innovation and innovation-based enterprises.
At the same time, it has helped in unlocking the latent creative energy of our billion plus people.
I take this opportunity to applaud the efforts of the National Innovation Foundation.
It has been working diligently in stimulating the creativity and innovativeness at the grassroots level all over the country.
I am happy that Director General of World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), Dr. Francis Gurry, is here with us today.
I am sure he will also see how important it is to give due weightage to the source of creativity and innovation emanating at the grassroots.
It can generate jobs and livelihood for masses all around the world.
Distinguished participants, ladies and gentlemen:
The industrial growth is becoming more jobless in nature, even in emerging economies.
In such a scenario, the Gandhian model of decentralized, distributed and diversified innovation-based enterprises is perhaps the best way forward to solve the problems.
Gandhiji had always wanted to blend modern science and technology with community knowledge and institutions.
I have witnessed the creativity of children, school and college students, and grassroots innovators.
However, the emergence of an inclusive innovation eco-system uniquely suited to India requires several more steps than what has already been taken by the government and civil society.
To create a feeling of celebration of grassroots and inclusive innovations in the country, the earlier exhibition of innovation has become a week-long Festival of Innovation.
The roundtables on inclusive innovations, public service delivery and financing of innovations have seen enthusiastic participation of distinguished experts with many concrete deliverables having emerged from these sessions.
These awards provide a link between innovation movement at grassroots level with the institutions of higher education.
Excellence is indivisible.
A healthy combination of excellence and relevance at all levels of society particularly among academic institutions is called for.
Ladies and gentlemen:
The academia has to closely study and understand how creative minds among the common man can solve local problems without much help from outside.
If they can get support from formal institutions, they can do much more.
I am told that ninety representatives from such clubs in different institutions will be meeting on 8th March.
Efforts in this direction will have to be complemented by deeper processes, which charge the key stakeholders with missionary zeal to make a difference.
Distinguished participants, dear friends:
Hence, I fully understand the role a teacher plays in the life of students.
Such inspired teachers, who can shape students into creative and innovative individuals, should be encouraged.
I have had the privilege to host inspired teachers from central universities and other institutions at Rashtrapati Bhavan under a special initiative called in-residence programme.
Such teachers feel motivated to rededicate themselves to the cause of inclusion, excellence and social relevance.
They have been mentored by scientists, technical experts and policy makers to realize the full depth of their innovations.
I will be meeting the fourth batch of these scholars as they start their two-week in-residence programme today.
A message that this country cares about grassroots innovations and other creative pursuits should reach everyone.
Ladies and gentlemen:
We must encourage them to pursue their curiosity and creativity.
We must help them discover the fascination of creating something new.
Thousands of visitors including children come to see Rashtrapati Bhavan regularly.
A permanent exhibition of inclusive innovations has been installed to highlight cultural creativity and educational, institutional and technological innovations scouted from all over the country.
I am sure that this exhibition will inspire every visitor to experiment and innovate.
With these few words, I conclude.
Let me once again congratulate all the award winners.
Thank you.
It has been the gateway to India for traders and religious missionaries from different parts of the globe.
The people of Kerala are known for their progressive thinking.
This August 15, India will complete seventy years since we became independent.
For 50 years before Independence, the economic growth rate of India was 0% to 1%.
In the last decade, our growth rate has averaged around 8%, making us the fastest growing large economy of the world.
Today, we are a 1.3 billion strong nation.
Literacy rate has gone up from 18 to 74 percent.
Food grains production has gone up from 45 million to an estimated 272 million tonnes in 2016-17.
We had to survive on import of food grains from abroad.
Today, we not only produce enough food grains to feed ourselves but are also exporting the same.
In contrast, today we are the 10thlargest industrialized nation in the world.
Our technological base as well as network of research laboratories and higher education institutions are looked upon by the world with admiration.
We not only reached the Mars in our very first attempt but also achieved it at a cost far lower than anyone else in the world.
India has transformed itself from a poor under-developed nation into the third largest economy in the world in PPP terms within a short span of seven decades.
We have firmly established within our country the rule of law, an independent judiciary and vibrant media as well as civil society.
Around 553 million people voted in the 2014 General Elections, an exercise matched in scale and scope by none else in the world.
Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
The notion of what is good governance must be defined by the need of the times and enriched by the experience of the decades.
Yet, the Constitution enshrines certain timeless values that should never be compromised.
It is against the touchstone of these values that we must constantly measure our performance.
It also establishes the principle of secularism.
To achieve social justice requires not mere governance but a recasting of mindsets and the transformation of social ethos.
That is the job not just of the legislature, the executive or the courts, but of each one of us.
This may appear to be a utopian dream for many, but the strength of a system lies in its capacity to ceaselessly work for its accomplishment.
The goal of political justice requires the continuous empowerment of marginalised sections of our society.
We owe ourselves to create a system in which access to politics is not limited to a privileged few but an average Indian also feels empowered enough to contribute.
We cannot distribute wealth which we do not possess.
Therefore, production of wealth must necessarily be one of the predominant objectives of state policy.
However, this must be imbued with the principle of equality on which there can be no compromise.
A sustainable society can only be based on the principles of equity and justice.
The Indian Constitution has been rightly described as a Magna Carta of socio economic transformation.
But, the people of India proved these prophets of doomsday wrong.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Not only does our Constitution guarantee equal rights to women but our culture and tradition also celebrate the feminine as divine.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
There should be no room in India for the intolerant Indian.
India has been since ancient times a bastion of free thought, speech and expression.
Our society has always been characterized by the open contestation of diverse schools of thought and debate as well as discussion.
Freedom of speech and expression is one of the most important fundamental rights guaranteed by our Constitution.
There must be space for legitimate criticism and dissent.
Friends,
India was a world leader in the field of education when our Universities like Nalanda and Takshshila were at the height of their glory.
Nalanda and Takshshila are not mere geographical expressions but representations of the idea for free thought which flourished in these great Universities of the past.
Our premier institutions of higher education are the vehicles on which India has to propel itself into a knowledge society.
These temples of learning must resound with creativity and free thinking.
Those in Universities must engage in reasoned discussion and debate rather than propagate a culture of unrest.
It is tragic to see them caught in the vortex of violence and disquiet.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Our first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru believed that democracy was something deeper than voting, elections or a political form of government.
Our leaders and political activists must listen to the people, engage with them, learn from them and respond to their needs and concerns.
Our law makers must never take the people for granted.
They must focus on the fundamental task of law making and raising of issues of concern to the people as well as finding solutions to their problems.
Legislation is the first and foremost responsibility of a Parliamentarian.
It is most unfortunate that time devoted towards legislation has been gradually declining in our Parliament.
To illustrate, the first Lok Sabha from 1952-57 had 677 sittings in which 319 bills were passed.
In comparison, the fourteenth Lok Sabha from 2004-2009 had 332 sittings and passed just 247 bills.
The fifteenth Lok Sabha had 357 sittings and passed 181 bills while the sixteenth Lok Sabha has had 197 sittings and passed only 111 bills (upto the 10thsession).
Figures are available for the time lost due to interruptions/adjournments from the Tenth Lok Sabha (1991-96) onwards.
Each one has gone to the voters and pleaded for their votes and support.
The trust placed by the people in the political system and those elected should not be betrayed.
Floor tests are not meant to be muscle tests.
The opportunity to represent the people is not a right or entitlement but a moral obligation and duty.
Our elected representatives owe it to the people of our country to act as models of exemplary conduct.
The Parliament of India and our Legislative Assemblies are central pillars on which the edifice of our democracy rests.
They are the supreme institutions comprising of members directly elected by our people.
It is through them that governments are held accountable by the people.
If they become dysfunctional, it results in not just paralysis of those institutions but creates an adverse impact across the system.
The debate and discussions which ought to take place in the open in the House of Parliament and Assemblies cannot be replicated elsewhere.
When they cease to function effectively, issues spill out onto the streets.
The very basis of our democracy gets undermined.
Let me read certain extracts from the well known speech made to a Constituent Assembly on November 25, 1949 by Dr. B.R.
However bad a Constitution may be, it may turn out to be good if those who are called to work it, happen to be a good lot.
The working of a Constitution does not depend wholly upon the nature of the Constitution.
The Constitution can provide only the organs of State such as the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary.
But this much is certain that if the parties place creed above country, our independence will be put in jeopardy a second time and probably be lost forever.
Let us strive for rapid progress but even as we do so, ensure that the benefits of economic progress percolate down to the poorest of the poor and those living in the furthest corners of our country.
Let us make the poorest in our land part of the story of a rising India.
I see a very bright future for India.
Our Constitutional values, young population and entrepreneurial abilities as well as capacity for hard work provide us the fundamentals required for rapid progress as well as the building of a caring and compassionate society.
India has changed dramatically in the last 70 years.
I am confident that in the next ten years, we will see even greater progress as we steer our nation, focused on further strengthening our open, democratic and inclusive society.
Thank you,
Jai Hind!
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Honourable Members,
Jai Hind!
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am delighted to welcome Your Highness and the esteemed members of your distinguished delegation to India.
Your State Visit is a testimony to our enduring bonds and time-tested friendship.
Our engagement today is driven by remarkable similarities in the aspirations of our two peoples and the ideals on which our two nations are based.
Your Highness,
India's relations with United Arab Emirates, a country to which we are geographically and culturally close, are deeply rooted in history.
We have, in recent times, expanded our ties into a wide-ranging relationship of political, economic, energy, defence and security co-operation.
It is a matter of immense satisfaction that we have, today, signed a Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Strategic Partnership and that we both desire to develop it to its maximum potential.
The historic visits of your respected father, His Highness Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan to India in 1975 and 1992 and my predecessor, President Smt.Pratibha Devisingh Patil to the UAE in November 2010 had placed our bilateral ties on a firm footing.
The landmark visit of Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, to your beautiful country in August, 2015 and the return visit of Your Highness in February, 2016 have elevated our engagement to a level that makes us set our sights even higher.
Your Highness,
We welcome your participation in establishing our Strategic Petroleum Reserves.
The UAE is amongst our top trading partners.
Our economic and commercial relations are today more broad-based than ever before, encompassing a wide range of products and services.
We look forward to a robust partnership with you in our National Infrastructure Investment Fund.
We, in India, rejoice at the giant strides of progress and prosperity made by our friends in the United Arab Emirates.
The Indian private sector is pleased to have made substantial investments in your country.
Our companies are globally reputed and have rich experience in executing infrastructure projects of the highest standards.
They are keen to partner in the preparations for the World EXPO 2020 in Dubai.
Joint defence production, space and renewable energy have been identified as priorities as we proceed.
Your Highness,
The United Arab Emirates have generously embraced a large number of Indian expatriates and have encouraged them to flourish and prosper, for which we sincerely thank you.
The positive contribution of this community to the development and progress of their host country has been well acknowledged and appreciated.
We are confident of your continued support in ensuring their safety and well-being.
I take this opportunity to reiterate the urgent need for responsible nations such as ours to continue our collective efforts against the forces of extremism, terrorism and intolerance which attempt to weaken the very fabric of our societies.
It is in our shared interest to work for peace and stability in both West Asia as well as South Asia.
Your Highness, our people value the friendship of the United Arab Emirates.
We wish His Highness, the President, good health and a long and happy life.
With these words, I once again welcome Your Highness and wish you and your delegation a fruitful visit to India.
Fellow citizens:
I convey my special greetings to members of our Armed Forces, Para-military Forces and Internal Security Forces.
Brothers and sisters:
We waited till 26th January, 1950 when the Indian people gave to themselves a Constitution to secure for all its citizens, justice, liberty, equality, and gender and economic equity.
We promised to promote fraternity, dignity of the individual, and unity and integrity of the nation.
On that day, we became the largest democracy of the world.
We are today the fastest growing amongst the major economies of the world.
We are the second largest reservoir of scientific and technical manpower, the third largest army, the sixth member of the nuclear club, the sixth member in the race for space, and the tenth largest industrial power.
From a net food grains importing country, India is now a leading exporter of food commodities.
The journey so far has been eventful, sometimes painful, but most of the times, exhilarating.
But we will have to learn to adjust our sails, quickly and deftly, to the winds of change.
Evolutionary and incremental growth will have to accommodate rapid disruptions brought in by advances of science and technology.
Innovation, more so inclusive innovation, will have to become a way of life.
Education will have to keep pace with technology.
In the race between man and machine, the winner will have to be job generation.
The velocity of technology adoption will call for a workforce that is willing to learn and adapt.
Our education system will have to join hands with innovation to prepare our youth for life-long learning.
Fellow citizens:
We are firmly on the path of fiscal consolidation and our inflation level is within comfort zone.
Though our exports are yet to pick up, we have managed a stable external sector with sizeable foreign exchange reserves.
Brothers and sisters:
These generations have had the privilege of acquiring education, pursuing opportunities and chasing dreams in a free nation.
This sometimes makes it easy for them to take freedom for granted; to forget the price that extraordinary men and women paid to win this freedom; to forget that the tree of freedom needs constant care and nourishment.
Democracy has conferred rights on each one of us.
But along with these rights, come responsibilities which have to be discharged.
They pursue their life goals, which they perceive will bring them fame, success and happiness, with single-minded devotion.
They consider happiness as their existential objective, which of course is understandable.
They search for happiness in the highs and lows of day-to-day emotions, and in the fulfilment of the objectives they have set for themselves.
They look for a job as well as a purpose in life.
Lack of opportunities leads to frustration and unhappiness which manifests itself in anger, anxiety, stress and aberrations in behaviour.
This has to be dealt with by inculcating pro-social behaviour through gainful employment, active engagement with community, parental guidance, and empathetic response from a caring society.
Brothers and sisters:
Happiness is equally the outcome of economic and non-economic parameters.
The quest for happiness is closely tied to sustainable development, which combines human well-being, social inclusion and environmental sustainability.
Brothers and sisters:
Multiple views, thoughts and philosophies have competed with each other peacefully for centuries in our country.
A wise and discerning mind is necessary for democracy to flourish.
More than the unison of ideas, a healthy democracy calls for conformity to the values of tolerance, patience and respect for others.
These values must reside in the hearts and minds of every Indian; inculcating in them a temperament of understanding and responsibility.
Fellow citizens:
Yet, we need more and not less of democracy.
The strength of ourdemocracy is evidenced by the fact that over 66 percent of the total electorate of 834 million voted in the 2014 General Elections.
The depth and breadth of our democracy sparkles in the regular elections being held in our panchayati raj institutions.
And yet, our legislatures lose sessionspanchayati rajto disruptions when they should be debating and legislating on issues of importance.
Collective efforts must be made to bring the focus back to debate, discussion and decision-making.
The imperfections have to be recognized and rectified.
The settled complacencies have to be questioned.
The edifice of trust has to be strengthened.
The time is also ripe for a constructive debate on electoral reforms and a return to the practice of the early decades after independence when elections to Lok Sabha and state assemblies were held simultaneously.
It is for the Election Commission to take this exercise forward in consultation with political parties.
Our economy is yet to grow at over 10 percent for an extended period of time to make a significant dent on poverty.
One-fifth of our countrymen still remain below poverty line.
We have to provide better amenities and opportunities to our people in villages to ensure a decent quality of life.
The competitiveness of the domestic industry has to be improved by focusing on quality, productivity and efficiency.
Women must be able to lead their lives with honour and dignity.
Children must be able to enjoy their childhood to the fullest.
We have to work harder to change our consumption pattern which has resulted in environmental and ecological de-gradation.
We have to appease nature to prevent it from unleashing its fury in the form of floods, landslides and droughts.
Reason and moderation should be our guide in dealing with such situations.
These forces have to be dealt with firmly and decisively.
The forces inimical to our interests cannot be allowed to grow.
We are all equal children before our mother;
And our motherland asks each of us in whatever role we play;
With integrity, commitment and unflinching loyalty;
Excellency, President Uhuru Kenyatta,
Honourable Ministers from Kenya,
Distinguished Guests,
Namaskar!
Habari Ya Jioni!
Not so long ago, in October last year, I had the pleasure of welcoming you to the Rashtrapati Bhavan when you participated in the Third India-Africa Forum Summit hosted in New Delhi.
Your State Visit to India this year, the first State Visit from Kenya since February 1981, reflects a new momentum in our bilateral co-operation.
You have experienced the famed hospitality of the vibrant State of Gujarat.
Over the centuries, theMuhindi in Kenya have been a bridge between our two countries - and today, theyMuhindi are as much a part of your society as your own tribes: they are even referred to as the 43rdtribe of Kenya!
Excellency,
Over the years, this mutual regard and understanding have deepened and evolved into a close relationship.
We have made substantial progress in every sphere of our cooperation.
The presence of more than forty premier Indian companies in Kenya bears testimony to the complementarities of our two economies.
India welcomes Kenyan business houses to explore the opportunities that our flagship schemes offer for partnerships and investments in our country.
Excellency,
Under your visionary leadership, Kenya has become one of the fastest growing economies of Eastern Africa.
India stands ready to assist Kenya further in her human resource development and capacity building efforts.
In our discussions this evening, we shared a sense of satisfaction at our flourishing people-to-people contacts.
This year, Indians represented the third largest tourist inflow into Kenya.
In turn, Kenyans favour India for business, education, medical treatment and also tourism.
In the 21st century, India looks forward to working with Kenya to fulfill the many shared aspirations of our respective peoples and contribute to global peace and stability..
Let this ancient adage inspire our joint efforts.Shikamana kama pete na kidole, meaning,
· to the everlasting friendship between India and Kenya.
Thank you!
I congratulate each one of you for your contributions to your counties of origin and India.
You have been the frontline envoys of Indian culture since long and I hope that you will remain the foremost emissaries of the unfolding Indian story.
As a people exposed to the best of western technology and yet having their civilisational moorings in the ageless and eternal ethos of India, you are doubly blessed.
The synergy of the west and the east that you represent, provides you with a unique position and opportunity that involves sharing knowledge between your home land and your adopted countries.
While you showcase India to your host countries, you also bring along the cultural heritage of your adopted lands to India.
They are Indian citizens who migrate for employment as low-skilled and semi-skilled labour.
They toil hard day and night, and save to send the fruits of their labour as remittances to India, to maintain their families back home.
This is especially true of people working in areas of strife and conflict, with their security and physical well being on the line.
In this regard, it is with satisfaction that I note the role played by their mother country in assuaging their concerns.
In swift and coordinated operations involving multiple Ministries and Organizations, we have been able to bring back thousands of fellow countrymen from strife torn Nations.
We have a young population which needs to be equipped with the professional and technical education of the highest standards.
They can also avail the fellowships and scholarship programmes offered by the Department of Science & Technology and Biotechnology, to explore avenues for joint research and development.
Through such collaborations, our Institutions, Entrepreneurs and Innovators can enrich our education sector and skilling efforts.
Thank You.
My dear Governors and Lt. Governors:
It began on a very promising note with the economy performing well, overcoming the weak global economic trends.
Though our exports have been affected by weak global demand, we have a stable external sector.
Reviving exports will remain a challenge but we can overcome it by improving the competitiveness of the domestic industry.
We all will have to be extra careful to alleviate the suffering of the poor which might become unavoidable for the expected progress in the long term.
While I appreciate the thrust on transition from entitlement approach to an entrepreneurial one for poverty alleviation, I am not too sure that the poor can wait that long.
They need to get succour here and now, so that they can also participate actively in the national march towards a future devoid of hunger, unemployment and exploitation.
The recent package announced by the Prime Minister will provide some relief.
The conduct of free and fair elections has made our democracy one of the most vibrant in the world.
Elections reflect the attitudes, values and beliefs of the people towards their political environment.
They symbolize the sovereignty of the people and provide legitimacy to the authority of the government.
They also serve the purpose of regulation of public policies and mobilization of public opinion.
Noisy debates can deepen the fault-lines in the society.
You, as Governors and Lt. Governors, command respect and attention of the people of your state.
Through your interaction and wise counsel, you can play an important role in easing the tensions in the society.
Goodwill must prevail between different communities.
At times, harmony may be put to test by vested interests.
Communal tensions may rear their ugly head.
Rule of law must form the sole basis of dealing with any such challenging situation.
Governors and Lt. Governors:
These values have to be preserved.
India is a multi-faceted nation of 1.3 billion people, 122 languages, 1600 dialects and 7 religions.
The multiplicity in culture, faith and language is what makes India special.
You can, through your calm influence, inculcate amongst the citizens of your state this fundamental ethos of our civilization.It is a country held together by strong but invisible threads
When you assumed this exalted office, you had taken an oath to protect, preserve and defend the Constitution.
This pious document protects the liberty of the people and promotes the well-being of the citizens.
It decrees inclusiveness, tolerance, self-restraint, and protection of women, senior citizens and weaker sections as essential ingredients of our polity.
Our institutions of democracy must operate on these vital features.
Strong credible institutions lead to good governance ensuring a healthy functioning of the democracy.
Dear Governors and Lt. Governors:
As chancellors and visitors of various universities, you can work with the academic leaders to effect holistic changes for quality up-gradation in the institutions of higher learning.
I have been exhorting the academia to concentrate on attaining excellence through original research and technology development.
A look at numerous social problems affecting millions of women and men in our farms and factories clearly shows that humane values have not yet become a dominant driver of our intellectual pursuits.
This should receive your focused attention.
Our interactions at the conferences at Rashtrapati Bhavan have yielded several positives in areas like: faculty sourcing and development; ICT for pedagogic refinement; research and innovation; industry-academia interface; and alumni involvement.
These institutions can leverage knowledge and experience to the benefit of all.
Your keen interest can rejuvenate a sector that is best positioned to support an innovation-led knowledge economy.
With art and culture, we can experience life in its fullest and most meaningful form.
They add to the overall happiness and well-being of the society.
Within the limited time available, let us share some of our key concerns.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Your Excellency, Mr. Almazbek Sharshenovich Atambaev, President of the Kyrgyz Republic,
Bishkek is closer to New Delhi than many major cities of India; and New Delhi is the closest world capital to Bishkek.
Our friendship flourished during the Soviet era and our Parliamentarians and leaders have maintained regular contacts since then.
One of its finest achievements is its steadfast preference for - and adherence to democracy.
We, in India, believe that a democratic system represents much more than just the periodic exercise of voting in elections.
It stands for continuous nourishment of the institutions of democracy.
Building these institutions is not an easy task, it demands personal as well as collective sacrifices.
We share your satisfaction that Kyrgyzstan, under your leadership, has succeeded in this effort.
Another commonality which binds us is our commitment to secularism.
With our growing population of 1.25 billion people and our resource constraints, our choices have led us to prioritise our abundant human capital.
We have given emphasis to innovation and the development of indigenous, appropriate and cost effective solutions to address the challenges that we face as we pursue our developmental goals.
Capacity building is one aspect of our experience that we have been glad to share with friends like Kyrgyzstan.
I am, therefore, confident that working together, India and Kyrgyzstan can achieve much for the betterment of not only our two peoples and our region but also of the world.
Your Excellency, Mr. President of the Republic of Tajikistan,
I warmly recall your previous visit in September, 2012.
You were the first Head of State to make a State Visit to India after I assumed office as President of India.
Your visit today, on the eve of the 25th anniversary of our diplomatic relations, bears testimony to the abiding friendship between our nations.
Since then, our co-operation has grown in substance and strength.
We value yourpersonal commitment to our relationship which has greatly contributed to its consolidation into a multi-faceted strategic partnership.
Both India and Tajikistan are opposed to this menace in all its forms and manifestations.
Our peoples, as secular and pluralistic societies, desire to live in peace.
For us, development and progress of our nations is of utmost importance.
As we reflect with satisfaction, on the outcome of our joint efforts in the past, we are confident of even greater success in the future.
I wish you and your distinguished delegation a fruitful visit to India.
I hope to highlight her leadership qualities, fighting spirit, tenacity and refusal to lose faith even when confronted with the worst odds.
We have nothing to hide.
We work in the sun and in the light.
I know what I am doing.
I am saving this man.
Friends, ladies and gentlemen,
She was then only 42 years old.
The Syndicate leaders in turn put up Neelam Sanjiva Reddy as their candidate.
Four out of six members of the CPB voted in favour of Sanjiva Reddy and he was declared the official candidate of the Party in the Presidential elections.
There were also differences between her and Deputy Prime Minister Morarji Desai on bank nationalisation and other economic policies.
Finally, Morarji Desai was divested of the Finance portfolio and he, then resigned.
Two questions are moot in this regard.
The Awami League also won 288 seats out of 300 in East Pakistan Legislative Assembly.
His party should also have been allowed to choose someone to be the Prime Minister of East Pakistan.
Instead of transferring power, President Yahya Khan visited Dacca on March 3, 1971 for discussions with Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.
Endless meetings were held without any agreement.
Finally, President Yahya Khan returned to West Pakistan on March 25 and the same night, a brutal crackdown was launched on the civilian population of Bangladesh.
Assault, murder, arson, loot and rape swept across Bangladesh.
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman himself was arrested from his house and taken to prison in West Pakistan.
A huge exodus of around one crore refugees entered India through our border states.
Indiraji neither buckled under pressure from the US nor fell victim to the posturing of China.
She showed that she was a leader with nerves of steel, fully equipped to lead India through any challenge.
Indiraji combined bold and quick decision making with careful planning, adequate preparations and single-minded focus to liberate Bangladesh.
Friends, ladies and gentlemen,
Sufficient literature is available on the Emergency and I do not want to enter into a debate on the subject.
Frivolous cases were instituted against her and in one instance, she was even made co-accused in a case of stealing eggs and chicken in Manipur.
She asked me to arrange for the same.
However, the Tea Estate owner was so scared to be seen with Indiraji that he refused to even open the door or offer a glass of water to drink.
Indiraji, however, remained steadfast through all these trials and tribulations.
She started touring the country extensively and met personalities like Vinoba Bhave and JP.
Indiraji worked round the clock with days starting at 6 a.m. and ending at 3 a.m. the next morning.
Often, her meetings were disturbed by demonstrations, disturbances and heckling.
The Congress Party was so short of resources that we had to sell photographs of Indiraji to make money.
Indiraji did not have major differences with Congress leaders like YB Chavan and Brahmanand Reddy.
She cooperated with them.
However, the Congress Working Committee became a forum for Indira baiting.
The then leaders of the Congress Party felt that the people had punished the Party for the Emergency.
Indiraji waited in the House for nearly three hours while formalities were being completed.
Her short period in the political wilderness revealed her true strength.
Under her inspiring leadership, it took Congress workers just about a year to regain courage, conviction and confidence in the future.
The Janata Government soon ran out of steam to face the opposition provided by a strong and determined Congress under the leadership of Indira Gandhi.
Even as media reports and editorials repeatedly wrote her off and predicted she could never come back, she proved them completely wrong and emerged as champion of the downtrodden, oppressed, kisans and working classes.
Friends,
But the people of India brought her back to power in 1980, within a short span of three years.
Her ability to take the rough with the smooth and not waver, resulted in them embracing her whole heartedly.
They returned one by one to join her ranks.
Brahmananda Reddy, in whose name the Reddy Congress was created, himself ended up quitting his party and joining the Congress (I).
Friends, ladies and gentlemen,
She said;
Every insult hurled at me will rebound.
Every punishment inflicted on me will be a source of strength to me.
My voice will not be hushed for it is not a lone voice.
It speaks not for myself a frail woman, and unimportant person.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
So before I proceed with my closing remarks, I want to thank each of one of you for your association and participation in these conclaves at Rashtrapati Bhavan.
You come to attend the conferences here at my request in spite of yourbusy schedule as heads of institutions you represent.
I am grateful to you for that.
In my address to higher educational institutions, I have repeatedly emphasised on improving excellence and improving rankings.
However, now some of our institutions feature regularly in top positions in international rankings.
I am sure others will also do so in the coming years.
Distinguished vice chancellors and directors:
Dear friends:
representsa vision of the future which we all want for our nation and the generations to come.
Irrespective of race, gender, faith or socio-economic background, institutions of higher learning are a place where merit triumphsover individual identities, in pursuit of excellence.
Distinguished heads of academic institutions:
This can only be done by improving the quality of faculty, mitigating faculty shortages, building a robust research and innovation eco-system, giving primacy to the rankings process, and developing linkages with industry, foreign universities and alumni.
We have had some successes.
A lot still needs to be done.
But I am convinced that we are moving in the right direction.
While we work on these, our vision should be clearly set on the following:
Faculty
(a) Shortageof facultyhas plagued our institutions for a long time.
We needinnovative mechanisms to address this problem on a long-term basis.
I compliment MHRD for launching the Global Initiative of Academic Networks (GIAN) last year under which close to 800 experts from abroad have evinced their interest in teaching in Indian institutions.
Effective implementation of these MOUs will bring in adjunct faculty from the corporate sector in addition to foreign faculty.
This rush of fresh air will rejuvenate the higher education system.
Research
(b) Qualityresearchmust get our utmost attention.
It should help propel higher level research in our country.
We should also prioritize research in our institutions on the basis of its relevance.
Innovation
(c) As I have often said, innovation is the currency of the future.
The one-week Festival of Innovations that we started in the year 2015 has now become the biggest congregation of innovative minds starting from grassroots innovators to IT professionals.
The roundtables on inclusive innovation and financing of innovation provide a forum for grassroots innovators, entrepreneurs and financiers.
The linkage between these entities in the innovation value-chain has now found a shape.
The launch of Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) will take this idea forward and provide a platform involving academics, entrepreneurs and researchers.
It will foster a culture of innovation and promote a network of world-class innovation hubs.
Unnat Bharat Abhyan is another area which calls for the attention of the higher education sector.
This initiative connects institutions with local communities to face developmental challenges of rural India is in an excellent manner.
It will also develop among the people / students a problem solving attitude.
Rankings
Let me thank the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) for collaborating with Rashtrapati Bhavan for this particular session.
CII has been active in bridging the higher education and industrial sectors.
I compliment CII and the partner organizations and urge them to continue this progressive exercise for the future.
The MOU count is 67 now.
I am hopeful of this trend becoming a movement in the future.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Being the storehouse of traditional wisdom, as also the nursery of new knowledge, the higher education eco-system influences the various growth centres of an economy.
Growth of the industrial sector depends on higher education in some important ways.
The quality of training provided to students employed by this sector determines the level of industrial competence, and industry provides an outlet for various research and innovations taking place at the university level.
Technological developments improve efficiency of factories resulting in products of better quality at lesser costs.
A strong interface between these two core sectors will have positive spin offs for the entire economy.
What is taught and researched in the higher education system must find application in the industrial sector.
Unless graduates meet the skill sets needed in the industry, their usefulness will not translate into tangible benefits for the employer.
The course work in our campuses must be aligned to industrial trends.
It is necessary to have corporate experts advising academic managers on the requirements in the industrial sector.
Their inputs can then be backed up with various scholastic modules including project work and internship.
This in turn would also make academic institutions better prepared to receive industry personnel for imparting mid-career training.
Distinguished participants, ladies and gentlemen:
A vast quantum of knowledge is created in the tertiary education system through research.
They find application in society through industrial and other sectors.
A robust industrial linkage, to my mind, provides an efficient mechanism for transfer of knowledge from the higher education system to the economic system.
It also leads to better coordination of R&D effort thereby avoiding duplication.
I am happy to find industry-interface cells in 90 central institutions now.
There are over 450 MOUs with the industry as on date.
I must say that the progress made in some of the MOUs exchanged last year is indeed good as brought out in the presentations this evening.
It gives me the confidence that we can soon shift our benchmarks to higher levels of performance so that both can reap full benefit.
Our MOUs have focused mainly on conferences, training of industrial employees, internship of students, adjunct faculty positions for industry experts, and transfer of academically created intellectual property to business enterprises through licensing.
While this is laudable, MOUs must also focus on high intensity linkages like research partnerships, shared incubators and research parks.
They must entail contracting of research-related work including consultancy, quality control, testing, certification and prototype development to institutions by industrial firms.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Research orientation between academic institutions and business establishments may differ.
Business entities may be focused on quick outcomes and faster availability of new products.
Universities and institutions may lay more emphasis on basic research having long gestation.
This requires human capital and soft skills.
The top management in both, Corporations as well as institutions must be involved in and convinced about collaboration as a strategic purpose.
They must deploy personnel who are capable of developing and maintaining partnerships, in an atmosphere of trust and harmony.
I hope more and more central institutes of higher learning, including non-technical institutions focused on liberal arts, would interact with industry in the future.
Wishing you all success and Godspeed in your endeavours!
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Everywhere and at every occasion, I was deeply touched by the warmth of the people of Israel towards my country and my people.
I take this opportunity to once again thank you for your gracious hospitality.
It is a great pleasure to receive you today in New Delhi.
We both have remained firmly committed to democratic values and continue to strive for our common goals of global security and peace.
Your leadership, past and present, has inspired your people to overcome unspeakable tribulations and emerge stronger.
Through sheer hard work and determination, you have built a highly progressive, confident and self-reliant nation.
Excellency,
Israel has advanced technologies and proven capabilities in these key sectors.
I am happy that you will be visiting one of the 15 Centres of Excellence in Agriculture set up with Israeliassistance.
To effectively respond to global challenges includingclimate change, we will need to collectively work for efficient solutions.
I am confident that together, India and Israel can realise this important goal.
As we celebrate 25 years of our diplomatic relations next year, India looks forward to further intensifying our partnership for our mutual benefit and the good of the world.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
to the health and well-being of President Rivlin and Mrs. Rivlin;
to the enduring friendship between the Republic of India and the State of Israel;
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen
A centre of learning since ancient times, Janakpur city has attracted scholars from all corners of the world.
It has been a fertile meeting place for intellectuals and scholars of all faiths.
I have been informed that the earliest written manuscript of the first Mandal of the Rig Veda was discovered near Janakpur.MandalRig Veda
Tales abound in our folklore of how Lord Buddha and Mahavira visited Janakpur during their spiritual journey across the region.
It is a city that has been established on the foundation of scholarship, hospitality and syncretism.
Friends,
The ties that bind Janakpur and Ayodhya have existed since time immemorial.
The residents of this great city are heirs to the bond of familial ties that were established between Raja Janak and Raja Dashrath.
People of India value this unique relationship, shared tradition and rich heritage.
Friends, India deeply values its partnerhsip with Nepal across diverse sectors.
I applaud the efforts of people and government of Nepal for achieving inclusive economic development, and ensuring a peaceful and prosperous life for its peoples.
Friends,
These two dharamshalas will, I hope, be of benefit to the pilgrims from both Nepal and India.
The ICPs at Birgunj and Biratnagar will be of great advantage to the people of Jankapur and the surrounding region.
These ICPs, with their modern, state of the art facilities, will be instrumental in promoting trade and tourism and facilitate the convenient movement of people across the border.
On this occasion, I would like to acknowledge his contribution to spreading Gandhian thoughts and philosophy and pay tribute to his cherished memory.
With our joint efforts, we can propagate, across the globe, the message of peace and love bestowed upon us by Lord Rama and Goddess Sita.
Let us all work together to achieve this noble objective with their blessings.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
A key principle of our consistent policy has been peaceful co-existence and shared prosperity.
In an increasingly globalizing, inter-connected and inter-dependent world, India believes that for our region to reach its full potential in socio-economic development, our nations must proceed with a shared vision for peace, stability and growth.
It is striving to consolidate the gains of multi-party democracy and is presently engaged in charting the course for socio-economic development in all its regions.
India applauds the enterprise and achievements of the people of Nepal.
We stand ready to share with Nepal our experience of building strong democratic institutions.
India welcomes the ongoing efforts of the Government of Nepal to take on board all sections of its society for effective implementation of its Constitution.
Trade and economic co-operation are foundational pillars of India-Nepal partnership.
It is important that we encourage our respective private sectors to enhance their engagement.
There are, today, tremendous opportunities in our manufacturing and services sectors.
With our long history of co-operation in this sector, we should be in a position to work together to overcome impediments and streamline systems.
We should, in a collaborative spirit, be able to effectively resolve issues related to market access and take steps to strengthen our trade infrastructure.
We must continuously work together to make trade and transit arrangements simpler for our business communities.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
My government has, to this end, launched several new initiatives for infrastructure development, agriculture and rural development, expanding efficient manufacturing capacities, harnessing new technologies, and developing a vibrant services sector.
This presents an opportunity for Nepal as well.
To channelize this energy in the right direction, we must invest in health, education, technology and employment generation.
We cannot remain hostage to the political baggage of history and prejudice, nor can we continue to follow policies that have failed to lift our people out of poverty.
It is matter of satisfaction that the small development projects - that we have jointly taken up - are benefiting local communities in Nepal.
Roads, bridges, irrigation, and energy are the areas of focus.
Development of border infrastructure and connectivity projects with Nepal such as Hulaki roads, cross-border rail links, Integrated Check Posts, cross-border transmission lines is intended to broaden the reach of economic prosperity in the region.
It is a matter of satisfaction that the first ever international oil pipeline in South Asia is under construction between India and Nepal.
We are augmenting the transmission infrastructure for enhanced supply of power: which would allow Nepal to import power from India.
The same infrastructure could then be used for exporting surplus power from Nepal to India once generation projects such as Arun-III and Upper Karnali are completed.
It is in the collective interest of populations on both sides of the border that our two Governments should work together expeditiously in the area of flood management and irrigation and proceed faster with regard to large multi-purpose projects like Pancheshwar and Sapt Kosi & Sun Kosi.
We are proud of the legendary valour and sacrifice of the Gurkhas in the defence of India.
As our security interests are interlinked, we must continue to consult and coordinate closely to safeguard our shared security interests.
India is happy to help Nepal with its human resource development.
Ourcommitment is reflected in the grant of around 3000 scholarships to Nepalese students every year, providing opportunities to study in Nepal and in India.
Nepal has been a crucible of social and cultural traditions of both the Hinduism and Buddhism.
Enhancing air, rail and road connectivity will facilitate tourism and normal movement of people.
Both India and Nepal have ratified the Paris Agreement on climate change.
We need to act decisively against this scourge on humanity.
The international community must work unitedly to thwart and isolate those who use cross border terrorism as an instrument of state policy.
We must, therefore, be very vigilant and prevent the misuse of our open border by those who do not have the best interests of India and Nepal at heart.
This is absolutely normal.
With enlightened leadership in both countries, regular consultations, open dialogue, mutual trust and goodwill, we have managed to overcome such eventualities.
I would underscore that it would be crucial, in our common interest, to stay focused on our shared objective of peace, stability and development for our peoples and our region.
They would be equal stake holders in shaping public opinion, analysing prevailing conditions and recommending effective strategies for success.
I would reiterate that we must not lose sight of our common goals.
It gives me great pleasure as the Supreme Commander to be present here amongst you in the beautiful surroundings of the OTA and reviewing this parade which heralds a new dawn in your lives as Commissioned Officers of the Indian Army.
As I look at each one of you I am filled with pride and confidence.
I congratulate the Commandant and his faculty for having toiled hard to turn out such a smart and capable set of young and vibrant military leaders.
I am sure each one of you present here and the rest of our Nation watching this Parade shares this sense of pride, which I feel.
Before going any further let me congratulate each one of you for the excellent standard of Drill and an outstanding Parade.
I must confess that, even now, every time I witness a Military Parade my veins throb with renewed passion and fervour for our splendid Armed Forces and our great Nation, India.
A few moments from now you will be commissioned as Officers into the finest Army in the world commanding the finest soldiers that walk this Earth.
On your shoulders and through your professionalism may the Indian Army rise to even greater heights!
Time and again our Country has fallen back on our Armed Forces in internal crisis situations, both man made & natural.
The 21st Century has ushered in its own set of challenges.
More than ever before India requires young men and women to take up the challenge of navigation through troubled waters and work tirelessly and selflessly even at the peril of their lives in the service of our Mother land.
Move ahead, the roll of drums announce your triumphal march;
With feet of glory, you shall cut out your own path;
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
Excellency,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Ladies and gentlemen,
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Your Excellency U Htin Kyaw, President of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar,
Daw Su Su Lwin,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It gives me immense pleasure to welcome Your Excellency, Mr. President, Daw Su Su Lwin and your distinguished delegation to India.
Excellency,
We appreciate your having chosen India for your first State Visit abroad as President of Myanmar.
Our two nations are old friends.
They all shared a deep commitment to Asian unity.
In January 1947, en route to London for negotiations for Burmese independence, Aung San had stopped in New Delhi for consultations with the Indian leaders.
U Nu and Pandit Nehru remained in close touch in the period before the independence of India on 15th August 1947 and the freedom of Burma on January 4, 1948.
He carried a sapling of the sacred Bodhi tree which was planted at the Shwedegon Pagoda.
These relationships created a great reservoir of goodwill that sustained our bilateral ties as Myanmar made the transition from military to civilian rule.
Today they inspire us as we make the road map for our journey ahead.
Excellency,
Through their vote, the people of Myanmar demonstrated their love and trust in Daw Aung San Suu Kyi.
Excellency,
As a friendly neighbour and development partner, India has always stood beside the people of Myanmar with support and assistance when it was required.
We are confident that the Kaladan and Trilateral Highway projects will significantly enhance connectivity, trade and economic prosperity in the regions that they serve; the Myanmar Institute of InformationTechnology in Mandalay and the AdvancedCentre of Agricultural Research and Education in Nay Pyi Taw have the potential to mature intocentres of excellence and agricultural research serving the whole of South East Asia.
Excellency,
As we look eastward to rejuvenate historical, cultural and commercial links between India and South East Asia, Myanmar is the first on our horizon.
As we work together towards our common developmental goals, India would be very happy to share with Myanmar our experience and expertise in power generation and exploiting natural resources in a sustainable manner.
We offer our tried and tested models for governance, federalism and theconstitutional and administrative arrangements necessary to support them.
Your visit has had an auspicious start in Bodh Gaya.
We are happy that you could visit the famed Taj Mahal and hope that you will be able to see some interesting aspects of New Delhi.
Indeed your visit opens a new and vibrant chapter in our bilateral relations.
We wish the people and government of Myanmar great success in their march towards democracy, progress and prosperity.
The health and happiness of His Excellency President, U Htin Kyaw and Daw Su Su Lwin;
The progress and prosperity of our peoples and countries; and
The enduring friendship and cooperation between India and Myanmar.
Its students, alumni and faculty have already established for themselves an excellent reputation in the country and abroad for their knowledge, intellect, character and leaderships skills.
I therefore convey my compliments to the management, faculty, alumni and students of this institution on this remarkable achievement.
I also congratulate all the students graduating today for their success in this prestigious institution.
Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Legal education has undergone a paradigm shift in the last two decades.
NLSIU must bridge the gap between the theoretical concepts and practical application.
It must ignite inquiry and spirit of asking questions on all issues.
I am happy to know that NLSIU has had, from the start, a Legal Services Clinic and a Centre for Women and the Law reaching out with legal aid and advice to women, as well as others from the disadvantaged sections of the society, and with mediation and negotiation for settlement of disputes.
Faculty and students of NLSIU also help in creating legal awareness mainly among women and girls through classes in colleges and schools in and around the city of Bangalore.
Its driving principle is a compact between state and citizen, a powerful public-private partnership nourished by justice, liberty and equality.
The Constitution represented a second liberation, this time from the stranglehold of traditional inequality in gender, caste, community along with other fetters that had chained us for too long.
I urge all of you students of law to study our Constitution well.
Understand our political system, its institutions and processes as established by the Constitution and law.
Analyse the choices that were made to build the country into what it is today.
Recognize that intelligent choices will need to be made for enabling this country reach her maximum potential.
You are amongst the brightest young minds in this country.
You must help policy makers make the right policies.
You must be willing to read, learn and formulate views on national issues.
A democracy cannot be healthy without informed participation.
It is not enough to merely vote periodically.
It requires effective implementations.
Be the change that you seek through participation in all matters relating to governance and the state.
Help the nation create better citizens who are able to access all the opportunities that our country and society offer.
Lawyers are given a special status in this country because society recognizes the special functions that they perform.
Lawyers have a duty to fight injustice wherever it exists.
Supreme Court of India has through public interest litigation provided a powerful instrument in the hands of the common people which strengthened our democracy.
I express my deep gratitude to the Supreme Court of India.
You have to be brave.
If you fear reprisal, remember that breaking an unjust system is about making difficult choices.
Mahatma Gandhi who was also a lawyer could not have forged the instrument of Satyagraha and led the people of India to Independence if he was not brave and willing to make the difficult choice of fighting against the colonial rulers in South Africa.
The legal fraternity, especially students of law, must be in the vanguard of the battle for the rights and welfare of our people.
Universities like NLSIU must take the lead in meeting contemporary challenges and ensuring that our civilizational values of love for motherland, performance of duty, compassion for all, tolerance, pluralism, respect for women, honesty in life, self-restraint in conduct, responsibility in action and discipline are fully entrenched in young minds.
Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I would like to request the student community of NLSIU to keep in mind the fact that your education is a gift of the state and society.
I congratulate you on having your own office building.
A shift in this modern and technically equipped new building now is definitely in tune with the character of contemporary Indian commerce.
Apart from being the breeding ground of various cultures and religions, it is this land that witnessed excellence in indigenous handlooms, setting up of nascent industries around jute and tea, iron ore, coal and petroleum.
Resplendent with a strong agricultural base this area and the city of Kolkata indeed emerged as the financial capital of India since as early as the late 19th century.
It was this part of India that had fuelled and sustained the European and the British Industrial Revolutions in the 16th and 17th centuries.
It was here that the great industrialisation dream of Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru in early post independent India, took shape.
For our nation to be placed in the comity of Nations that comprise the developed world, it is Eastern India that will have to play the leadership role.
Apart from being rich in mineral resources, abundant rains, rivers and forests, exceedingly fertile land and an aspiring demographic advantage, eastern India also is a fertile ground for domestic as well as outside investment.
The Look East policy of the government has opened new doors of opportunities for entrepreneurs.
The Bharat Chamber of Commerce comprising Captains of Industries from the region, therefore, as I said earlier have a special challenge and responsibility on their shoulders.
While I exhort you to avail of these opportunities and drive the engines of growth, I would also like to impress upon you that the growth models and techniques that you use should essentially take into account ways and means that ensure equitable growth.
It gives me confidence that this new building of yours housing stalwarts of the Chamber will chart new heights in the days to come.
I hope that this building will become the new hub for accelerating business development and economic growth under the aegis of the Bharat Chamber of Commerce.
I started the practice of addressing the academic community in higher education in January 2014.
This is the sixth such occasion and I must confess that I eagerly look forward to this periodic interface on e-platform.
In the networked environment of today, we need the power of youth to realize the full potential of an aspirational India.
For this, creative thinking and a desire for innovation must become a part of our day-to-day lives.
Friends:
Yet, we are confronted with enormous problems of poverty, inequality, unemployment, resource scarcity, and poor infrastructure.
While we need cutting edge technologies for rapid creation of world-class infrastructure and its maintenance, we also need solutions for including the excluded ones in the development process.
As the democratic aspirations rise, we have to find new ways of reducing disparities.
Many times, we cannot solve the problems by merely redoubling our efforts.
We need to change the approach, the design, the delivery method and the means.
On account of our size, diversity and complexity, our circumstances are unique.
Adopting global models for development can at best be of limited use.
Our development model has to be linked to the aspirations of our people and must respond to their needs.
Innovations must preserve our diversity and benefit the wider spectrum of the society.
Friends:
Some innovations aretransformational in nature where the changes are disruptive.
Another category issocial innovationsthat are primarily aimed at providing socially useful services for which clients may not have the capacity to pay.
Friends:
I will also outline the challenges that confront us in making India more compassionate and collaborative to meet the social needs.
I am happy that Prime Minister in his recentMann ki Baat has exhorted countrymen to create an innovation eco-system.
He talked about a very positive initiative Atal Innovation Mission, to promote innovations and start-ups all over the country.
I agree completely with his message of AIMing to lead through Innovations.
The idea of unleashing creativity of children is also the right one.Mann ki Baat
Friends:
I will call upon educationists, corporate leaders and community leaders to think of extending such recognition to creative and innovative people of our country.
No matter how busy you are, find some time in a year for such people for igniting your imagination.
In this festival, global roundtables and other interactive sessions provide innovators, entrepreneurs and financiers a platform for conversion of ideas into marketable products.
For us, a smart township means a humane, hi-tech, heritage and happy township which ensures an enhanced quality of life that contributes to the well-being of its residents.
I think our smart cities, towns and villages, as we develop them, too must be humane, hi-tech and happy leading to the creation of a technology-driven but compassionate society.
Friends:
Our collective dream will be fulfilled only when we build upon creative ideas of all citizens, by providing them pathway to persevere, sustain, and make a difference.
a) One: we should not snub children when they ask questions to which we have no answer.
We should admit our ignorance, seek relevant information from those who may know and whet their curiosity.
Unless our children learn to question, experiment, their imagination will not expand; and their innovative potential will not be realized.
b) Two: we should promote and reinforce a scientific temper by questioning our beliefs which are not compatible with scientific way of thinking.
The futuristic societies build upon unconventional ideas.
They are not afraid of failures; they take risks and forgive well intentioned mistakes.
c) Three: innovation clubs and tinkering labs should be set up in schools, colleges and research institutions.
Youth must learn tosearch, spread, andcelebrate inclusive innovations and sense the unmet social needs of communities in their hinterland.
I have seen paddy transplantation in my village when women work with their feet in water, back bent in painful posture for hours transplanting paddy.
We should also become sensitivetowards the problems faced by working class, elderly, and specially-abled, of our country.
Only then will compassionate creativity blossom.search, spreadcelebratesense the unmet social needs
d) Four: we should build viable andsustainable bridges between formal and informal knowledge systems.
With climate change risks, and uncertainty looming large on the horizon, the knowledge of the communities which have lived with these uncertainties for millennia cannot be ignored.
As resources become scarce, we will have to learn to share more and more.
The value system which promotes public and common good over individual interest should power individual entrepreneurship.sustainable bridges between formal and informal knowledge systems
e) Five: we must give due recognition to cultural, technological and traditional skills while implementing our employment guarantee schemes and skill development programmes.Nobody is, truly speaking, unskilled.
A knowledge society has to harness unique strengths of each person.
We should also encourage artists, performers, sculptors, etc., to teach their art to our children in schools, and nurture younger generation which may like to contribute towards cultural economy.Nobody is, truly speaking, unskilledcultural economy
f) Six: I have been interacting with vice chancellors and directors of various institutions of higher learning during the last four years.
I have impressed upon them to promote innovation in every subset of education so that younger generation grows with a creative and problem solving mindset.
We should bring our educational system in line with contemporary societal expectations.
g) Seven: There are many simple problems that we face in our daily life but we learn to live with these problems rather than find systematic solutions.
h) Eight: We must develop a sense of immediacy.
Time and tide waits for none.
In a fiercely competitive environment, to be in a hurry and have some impatience is a necessary virtue.
i) Nine: We must not tolerate inefficiency, shabbiness and poor quality work.
I will be happy to hear from you about the ideas you have for making India a creative, compassionate, collaborative and innovative society.
Our government wants to use your ideas constructively.
The knowledge and culturally rich but economically poor deserve our support for a more dignified future.
If we overcome some of our inertia, stop complaining always about what is wrong around us and instead focus on what is right, bright and creative, we can indeed change our work culture and the mindset.
Great nations need to reinvent their social mores, and redefine social aspirations to include the last in the line.
Stay engaged with creative and compassionate forces in our society.
That's how India will become not only a developed but also a caring and sharing society.
Jai Hind.
Jai Hind.
The speech of the President of Namibia at this banquet will be considered an important milestone in the bilateral relations between India and Namibia.
I consider myself privileged by the presence of founders of SWAPO and leaders of Namibia who not only led the liberation struggle but also made important contributions so that the people and Government of Namibia can occupy their rightful place in the comity of nations.
Your Excellency,
Our two nations, though separated by the Indian Ocean, are united by our common experience of colonial exploitation and struggle for freedom.
India believed that her own independence in 1947 would remain incomplete so long as her brethren in Africa continued to be oppressed by colonial rulers.
India stood shoulder to shoulder with the people of this country and other African countries in their freedom movement.
We were proud to be the first nation to host a diplomatic mission of SWAPO.
Millions in India rejoiced when your heroic struggle bore the sweet fruit of freedom and independence.
India was the first country which on the eve of its liberation in 1946 decided to snap ties with South Africa on grounds of apartheid prevalent there despite the fact that South Africa was an important trade partner of India at that time.
Dr. Sam Nujoma, the Founding President of Namibia, was admired as a leader and great friend of India.
His stewardship of the people of Namibia into a new era of peace, security and democracy is his greatest gift to them.
His cherished legacy has been further consolidated by his visionary successor, your predecessor, former President Pohamba.
Under your able leadership, Your Excellency, Namibia is surging ahead on the path of development.
We, in India, welcome its principles and wish it great success.
Your Excellency,
Our two countries have been cooperating closely while making sustained efforts to realize the developmental goals of our two nations.
We have focussed on human resource development, capacity building, cultural exchanges and closer cooperation in the education and defence sectors.
Namibia is blessed with rich natural resources and an abundance of mineral wealth.
Their efficient extraction and value addition using environment-friendly methods will contribute to the sustainable development of this sector of your economy.
Our flourishing bilateral trade and economic relations remind us of the still greater potential that is waiting to be realized.
India is fully committed to the implementation of the projects and initiatives that we have jointly identified.
Your Excellency,
They have a responsibility to work together for peace, security, and sustainable development in our two continents.
It is truly ironic that the most effective organisation of the United Nations, the Security Council does not represent India, a country where every sixth citizen of the world resides.
The entire continent of Africa is also not represented in the Security Council.
It is high time that the ground reality of the world today gets representation in the permanent membership of the Security Council.
I take this opportunity to convey through you and Mme Geingos, my best wishes to the people of Namibia.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
We bring to you the greetings and best wishes of the people of our country.
Today we are neighbours across the Indian Ocean.
Thank you.
I am deeply touched by the warm welcome accorded to me - and to my delegation - and the unstinting hospitality extended to us since our arrival.
I consider it to be emblematic of the long standing mutual friendship between the peoples of our two countries.
He was a true son of India as well as Africa.
I take this opportunity to commend your tireless efforts in bringing peace and stability to your country.
Over years of working together closely for the benefit of our peoples, our two Governments have developed a successful framework for our bilateral co-operation.
Our partnership has, in recent years, become increasingly multifaceted, dynamic and rewarding.
Given the relative size of our economies and our wide convergences in several sectors of common interests, we both agree that our trade and investment and economic co-operation does, indeed have a greater potential that is waiting to be fully realised.one billion US dollars
Our public and private sectors are keen to join you in exploring these resources efficiently and in setting up agro-based industries.
We have both demonstrated our commitment to democratic values.
Both our countries are active participants in regional and international fora and have worked together in close cooperation on matters of shared interest and concern.
We would like to see them reformed so that they remain effective in addressing the challenges that confront the world today.
In this context, India stands ready to shoulder greater responsibilities in the specialized organs of the United Nations, particularly its Security Council.
We have been co-ordinating closely in regional and multilateral fora on this and other key issues including disarmament, climate change and sustainable development.
I look forward to welcoming you in New Delhi.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
- To the enduring friendship between the peoples of the Republic of India and the Ivory Coast.
Thank you.
He is a respected voice in global affairs and South-South cooperation.
I have no doubt that you will equip yourselves thoroughly and develop your capabilities comprehensively to one day make your own valuable contributions to the progress of your great country.
Your success will be a tribute to the friendship and close partnership between Ghana and India.
I thank you once again!
Ghana is a trusted friend of India.
Our two countries have had a similar political history and today, as developing economies, we have a shared vision for our peoples.
India values Ghana's friendship and is committed to partnering Ghana in achieving its goals of sustained development and growth.
They, like you, have only recently transitioned from a protected business environment in post-Independence India to succeed as global giants today, competing with the best in the world.
They are familiar with the challenges faced in developing economies.
We have learned that calibrated foreign investments are the key to rapid growth in a developing nation.
If a conducive environment is facilitated, the Indian Government would be ready to work with you in key sectors and areas of common interest and encourage Indian private as well as public entrepreneurs to bring more investments into Ghana.
I have no doubt that both sides recognize the potential and the synergies that are waiting to be exploited.
However, I would encourage the Ghanaian entrepreneurs to diversify and expand their exports to India.
During the third India-Africa Forum Summit in October last year in New Delhi, India earmarked US$ 10 billion for diverse projects in Africa and capacity building efforts.
Government of India looks forward to working with Ghana to identify projects for utilisation of these funds in Ghana.
Ghana's current Vice-President, Mr. Amissah Arthur had participated in the most recent partnership Summit in March 2016.
The private and public sectors on both sides should take advantage of the desire and commitment of the two governments to deepen their mutual economic stakes.
Government of India has been happy to extend assistance to Ghana through grants and Lines of Credit, despite her own resource constraints.
With the active involvement of Government of Ghana and organisations such as Ghana Investment Promotion Council, we could together identify viable projects for the Indian private sector to invest in.
Indian multi-national companies are active and successful in several countries in Africa and would be more than happy to come to a friendly country like Ghana.
They recognise that Ghana is the first sub-Saharan nation that marched ahead to become a lower middle income country.
Indian private sector appreciates the peaceful, secure and stable environment of Ghana, which is a critical requirement for any investor.
The Indian private sector is equipped with funding capacity as well as appropriate technologies.
They stand ready to work with their Ghanaian counterparts as partners for mutual benefit.
I am accompanied by a delegation of Parliamentarians that represent diverse regions of our country.
It is a bond forged in the hearts and minds of our two peoples.
Under your black veil
Your human aspect remained unknown,
Blurred by the murk of contempt.
Others came with iron manacles
Slavers came, with an arrogance
more benighted than your own dark jungles.
Flaunted its naked inhumanity.
With blood and tears;
He embodied Africa's dignity, and inspired the peoples and the governments of African countries to claim their rightful place in global affairs.
I have no doubt that your dynamic government has already set itself new goals for achieving even greater heights of progress and prosperity for your people.
I offer you my best wishes for the success of your endeavours.
Not only in Western Africa, but in the entire African Continent, Ghana is regarded with respect - as a nation of robust democratic institutions.
Our bilateral relations have expanded and deepened over the years.
Both investments and trade have seen rapid growth.
The Government of India and the Indian corporate world recognize the rich potential of the Ghanaian economy.
Indian companies would be happy to invest in Ghana if the right opportunities are given to them.
We look forward to working with you to realise the full potential of our synergies to our mutual benefit.
India will be happy to offer assistance and support in all areas where it is required by you.
Our scholarship programmes under the Indian Technical Cooperation Programme and Indian Council for Cultural Relations are open to you and we welcome your citizens to avail our schemes for human resource development.
The Government of India seeks Ghana's continued support in fulfilling the vision of the Forum and achieving its common goals for realising the collective aspirations of our peoples.
I take this opportunity to congratulate Your Excellency, President Mahama, on your appointment by the Secretary General of the United Nations as the Co-Chair of the Advocacy group on Sustainable Development Goals.
India recognised and appreciated Ghana's active role in the fight against Ebola.
It is a serious anomaly that India, home to every sixth citizen of the world and Africa, a vibrant hub of the global economy, still remains out of the UN Security Council.
It is a scourge that knows no borders; it has no ideology except the ideology of wanton destruction.
It must be eradicated through the collective efforts of the civilised world.
I am glad to note that they have become an important bridge linking our two countries.
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
May I request you to join me in raising a toast:
Thank you!
The awards ceremony today coincides with the 95thbirthday of Malti-ji.
My best wishes to her on this special day!
May God grant her the strength to continue her seven decades of dedicated service to the cause of education!
I take this opportunity to compliment Shri Manoj Singhal, President of the Mohinder Singh Syngle Education and Research Society, for his initiative in introducing this Award and also for his passion in spreading quality education in the rural areas.
I also appreciate the efforts of the state government of Punjab for recognizing and collaborating with the selection process.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It must produce in the citizens a capability to think about their responsibilities and duties towards the society, people surrounding him or her and the country.
Educated minds have the capacity to analyze information and sift the right from the wrong.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
A holistic education system enables us to put values at the forefront of the educational enterprise in schools and colleges.
Such a system is conducive to the ideal development of society.
I see a pivotal role for teachers in this endeavour.
Such teachers are there even today.
I call them inspired teachers.
Theyencourage students to be inquisitive and explore new frontiers of knowledge and understanding.
Inspired teachers themselves have deep knowledge of their subject areas.
They are able to assist students in understanding and appreciating the subject from different perspectives, and in fact, help them in constructing new knowledge.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
A sound school system is possible only with teachers of good quality devoted to the profession.
Teachers have to ensure that educational processes no longer remain confined to the classroom-based education.
They have to design learning experiences for their students through innovative methods and teaching aids to equip the young minds to learn, explore and contribute to the society.
This underlines a need to strengthen our cadre of teachers through capacity building.
I have said earlier that education is the true alchemy that can bring India to its next golden age.
Yet, a lot of work is still required on the ground in terms of covering the less fortunate children and creating the right kind of infrastructure for their education.
Government efforts alone are not enough to bring about change in this system of education.
It has to be complemented by initiatives from the private sector and voluntary organizations.
I appreciate the work done by the Mohinder Singh Syngle Education and Research Society in imparting quality education and inculcating skills in rural youth in a commendable way.
My best wishes to all of you!
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I was very interested to hear the presentations of select academic leaders from both countries and the outcomes of their deliberations.
The themes on which you have focused your discussions, are vital for the future of university education in both our countries.
They are at the core of modernisation and upgradation of standards and content in institutions of higher learning all over the world today.
As far back as the 6th Century, seats of higher learning like Nalanda, Takshashila, Vikramashila, Valabhi, Somapura and Odantapuri had drawn scholars and cultivated contacts and academic exchanges with famed institutions of other countries in the region and beyond.
Today, Government of India, in partnership with Indian and international foreign partners is taking a number of far reaching initiatives to revive this tradition and create centres of excellence that can be ranked among the leading institutions of the world.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Future growth of nations will result not so much from the utilization of resources with existing technology than from its better usage through more advanced technology.
Investment in research is important.
While R&D expenditure as percentage of GDP in India is about 0.8 percent at present, we are making concerted efforts to increase this number.
The quality of students passing out from educational institutions is almost always inspired by the quality of teaching, research and orientations towards research and innovation.
India is a relatively young country with 60% of its population in the age group of 15 to 59.
Under this programme, we are engaging faculties from abroad for a short term teaching assignments in higher educational institutions.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
These developmental challenges call for an inspired response from the higher education system.
Building a sound research eco-system calls for a slew of measures like collaborative partnerships and joint research projects.
I am confident that these understandings will create a collaborative platform for academic cooperation in the areas of research and education, joint seminars and exchange of faculty and students.
When Indians and Chinese come together to address global challenges and build on their shared interests, there will be no limits to what our two peoples can jointly achieve.
With these words, I thank you, once again and wish you success in your collaborations.
I am delighted to be here today at this prestigious institution of higher learning.
The Peking University is world renowned for the erudition of its scholars and inspired leadership.
Its contribution to the rich academic exchanges between Indian and Chinese thinkers is noteworthy.
This University has preserved and continued this tradition of a very rewarding interaction between scholar-monks of both India and China and strengthened mutual understanding through knowledge sharing and exchange of ideas.
We cannot imagine our common history without the central contribution of Kumarajiva or Bodhidharma or the records and experiences of XuanZangand Fa Xian from China.
However, it is a matter of great satisfaction that as we pay tribute to the outstanding legacy of these masters, we also vigorously re-engage to revive and re-connect this most satisfying aspect of our people to people relations.
Similarly, the Chinese people recall, with appreciation, the 1925 Resolution of the Indian National Congress in support of China after British-Indian troops had been dispatched to suppress an anti-imperialist struggle in China.
The Medical Mission led by Dr. Kotnis in 1938 was yet another example of the genuine bonds of friendship and humanity between our people.
This will not be an easy task.
We will need to overcome obstacles with resolve and fortitude.
We must persevere to realise this dream.
We can do this together.
We can do it if we join hands in a durable friendship.
One of the ways it could be done is throughenhanced political communication.
In India, we have a bipartisan commitment to strengthening our partnership with China.
The frequent contacts between our respective leaders bear testimony to this.
Both sides should work with the aim of ensuring that we do not burden our coming generations by leaving our unresolved problems and differences to them.
China is our largest trading partner.
Our developmental experiences are arguably most relevant for each other.
Our respective achievements in infrastructure, mobility, energy, skills development, healthcare, education and urbanization offer a fertile ground for exchange and cooperation.
Our defence & security exchanges now include annual military exercises.
There is greater Chinese investment in India and vice versa.
Government-to-Government mechanisms include high-level dialogues between the National Reform and Development Commission of China and the NITI Aayog of India.
When Indians and Chinese understand the benefits of cooperating to address global challenges and as they perceive the advantages of building shared interests, we will, in doing so, unleash the potential of our mutually advantageous partnership.
There are no limits to what our two peoples can jointly achieve.
This can be achieved by closer contacts at all levels.
As you are aware, India chose to be a secular parliamentary democracy.
Our system of participative governance is founded on the principles of tolerance, inclusiveness and consensus.
Attempts to derail our peace through acts of terrorism have not shaken our faith.
Our society is resilient and public interest is protected by a free media, an independent judiciary and a vibrant civil society.
In spite of having more than a third of the world's population, the contacts between the people's representatives on both sides are still very limited.
More regular contacts between our people's representatives at official and non-official levels is the need of the hour.
A good beginning was made in establishing the India-China State / Provincial Leaders Forum during Prime Minister Modi's visit to China last year.
We are encouraged that Province-to-State contacts are now growing and both sides are working to expand exchanges between local bodies.
Our youth share common aspirations and perceptions.
Yoga in India and Tai Chi in China as well as traditional medicine are part of our cultural heritage.
Our annual India-China Think-Tank Forum and High-level Media Forum are good initiatives.
Greater exchanges between institutions of higher learning, more cultural festivals and joint research and scholarship programmes can help dispel the notion that we need to look to the West and not to each other to make progress in education, science & technology.
It is obvious that in the coming decade, Indians and Chinese will represent the largest volume of tourist travel globally.
The immense potential of India as a tourism destination must be better projected.
I commend both Governments for holding the Visit India Year in China last year and the Visit China Year in India this year.
We welcome your Government's decision to open a second route for the Kailash-Mansarovar pilgrimage.
Indians would like to have more opportunities to travel to their holy sites in China and, in turn, welcome more Chinese visits to Buddhist pilgrimage centres in India.
We can use such platforms to enhance public awareness of the desire of both our countries for a shared future shaped by us together.
As our respective peoples and the world see our Governments working together at the global and regional level, they, too, will support and contribute to the achievement of our shared goals.
We are pleased that in the past decade there has been substantial growth in our bilateral trade and investment ties, but there is a vast untapped potential waiting to be fully realised.
Let us jointly innovate to create a new model for business.
Friends,
Through your inspiring work and achievements, you have shown the way for the future of this important relationship.
Ladies and gentlemen,
We see that envoys were exchanged with the Tang dynasty, between the Song Emperors and the Chalukya and Pallava Kings of southern India, and even between the Ming Emperor Yong Le with the Muslim Sultan Ghiyas-uddin of Bengal in the first quarter of the 15th century.
Many Indians do not know that during the First World War, Sun Yat Sen had assisted Indian revolutionary, Rash Behari Bose to escape arrest by the British.
Our cultural interaction was so harmonious it created syncretic cultures in South East Asia and Central Asiawhich were neither wholly Indian nor Chinese but a colourful confluence of both.
Excellencies,
We seek to develop a matrix of cross-cutting contacts to enhance our mutual understanding and enrich ourbilateral discourse.
Far too often, we rely on borrowed prisms and secondary sources to understand each other.
We seek to overcome this by increasing direct exchanges and enabling people on both sides to invest in each other's progress.
Excellencies, Ladies & Gentlemen,
Realising the full potential of our relationship is a shared responsibility.
Our Governments have a primary role, but the efforts of civil society, academia, think tanks, cultural icons and artists are equally important.
May your tribe flourish and grow.
This historic city has always been an important port of call for Indian business.
As I stand before you today, I would, at the very outset, like to say that this is an exciting time for India and China to reinforce the old linkages and join hands for new.Smart City
Our primary goal is to build a modern economy that puts a premium on sustainable development.
We are steadily moving towards this objective and a profound socio-economic transformation is taking place in our country.
China's economic achievements are a source of inspiration for us.
We will facilitate your efforts to make your investments in India profitable.
We must take advantage of the
We believe that India cannot grow in isolation.
In an increasingly interconnected world, India would like to benefit from technology advances and best practices of different countries.
The comprehensive reforms introduced in key areas of our economy have enhanced the ease of doing business in India.
Our Foreign Investment regime has been liberalized through simplified procedures and removal of restrictions on foreign investments.
These reforms have renewed the interest of global investors in India.
In 2014, there was a 32% growth in investments and in 2015, India emerged as one of the biggest global investment destinations.
As you are aware, India, today, presents a promising demographic scenario.
The average age of its population will reach 29 years by 2020.
At the same timesustainab, it is important to ignite the spirit of innovation and entrepreneurship in all sectors of our economy.
India welcomes your participation in these programmes.
The stability of our relationship in recent years provides an enabling basis for utilizing these opportunities and coming together.
To realize the full potential of our economic partnership, it is important to bridge the information gap between our business communities.
We are committed to providing a conducive environment for more investments from China.
We stand ready to facilitate many more collaborations between the industry and businesses of our two countries across different sectors.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
At the outset, let me congratulate Team-Rashtrapati Bhavan and Team-IBM for the conceptualization, collaboration and quick implementation of this important project aimed at converting the Estate into a smart township.
The complexity in governance offers scope for innovation and adoption of global best practices.
We have progressed as a nation at an amazing pace over the last few decades.
In the process, we have brought about an immense transformation in the lives of the citizens.
Still we have miles to go before we can legitimately claim to have provided basic necessities to each and every citizen of this country.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This township is a micro-cosmic India where residents belong to different regions, pursue different faiths, and observe diverse customs, habits and traditions.
The campus has a mandir, a masjid, a gurudwara inside; and a church across the road.
The township has schools, holistic healthcare centres, dispensaries, libraries, markets, museums, banks and post offices.
We followed a value-oriented governance model that is based on the core civilizational values of compassion and service to others.
Such a model relies on happiness to come not from material well-being but from following values that are the highest principles of human existence.
Our approach to welfare in the Estate was on these lines.
The works undertaken related to modernization of the school, improvement of infrastructure, efficient management of water, energy and waste, preservation of heritage, and introduction of recreational and sports infrastructure.
When I was presented with the idea of this transformation early on, I told my Secretary that we should attempt to fashion this estate as a 3H township, that is, Humane, Hi-tech and Heritage Township.
I have had the occasion to observe the activities undertaken in the township since July, 2012.
And, I feel that the initiatives relating to senior citizens, specially-abled children, pre-school children, sports plus programme, holistic health care, modernization of school, skill development, and cultural programmes have enhanced the quality of life of the residents of the Estate.
There is always a possibility to add a coat of paint to make a wall a shade brighter.
If I were to use a word to describe a human emotion associated with this ongoing transformation of quality of life in the township, it will be happiness.
It is happiness that holds the key to the well-being of people and for the development of human society.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Some have moved faster than us.
They have excelled in many areas of urban governance.
When we as Indians are challenged about the quality of living, infrastructure and other basic services, we generally have a tendency to explain the difficulty in performance to the size of the country and its population.
We have to keep aside such excuses and find our own solutions taking into account the size, diversity, complexities and other barriers.
We must remember that small building blocks like villages and townships ultimately cumulate into urban spaces, and then gradually lead to cities.
In this context, I would like to mention that we are in the process of replicating our Rashtrapati Bhavan experience of Smart Township by applying and transferring our knowledge and expertise to five villages in an adjoining state.
We will try to convert these villages into model smart villages by following a convergence model.
This will lead to the leveraging of different stakeholder expertisein finding unique solutions to the varied problems at the village level.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Measurable performance parameters to judge the performance of the different departments under the Secretariat would help in the incentivization process.
This approach in urban governance where we recognize stakeholders for their contribution to public causes is noteworthy.
There is enough on this Earth to meet the need of the society as a whole, but over exploitation and greed could lead to disasters and catastrophe.
In this context, technology is a powerful enabler to optimize the utilization and management of resources.
It will lead to more realization from less.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
These three programmes being implemented are transformative in nature and their successful results will alter the governance landscape of the country.
I would like to particularly compliment the domain leaders of Energy, Water, Waste, Horticulture and PNG who along with their teams, are willingly adopting the change and are becoming a part of the change they want to see.
My blessings and best wishes for the endeavours!
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
At the outset, let me extend my warm greetings to the entire nursing fraternity on this occasion.
Florence Nightingale viewed nursing as an independent profession, which shares a unique relationship with the medical profession.
Nursing professionals are the backbone of the healthcare system.
Through education and innovation, this profession has undergone considerable professionalization over the last few decades.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Their level of commitment and care are much valued in both urban and rural areas, including remote areas of the country.
Their inputs into health sector policies are equally important for they help in creating the necessary supportive work environment for their practice.
Emerging global threats such as microbial resistance, new pandemics, infections, and natural disasters have added to the pressure and demands on healthcare services.
Such a leadership will pursue the interests of the nursing workforce and organize them to meet the evolving nature of the professional demands with efficacy.
They will also have an important role in advancing inter-professional collaboration and ensuring that it is supported by appropriate governance and policies.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
They are now more adept at communicating with patients, and connecting with citizens, communities and policy makers.
In the next fifteen years or so, the nature of their services will undergo significant change.
Training and capacity building in this field will require new levels of innovation and leadership.
Nurses have made important contributions to the improvement rate of child survival.
Their role and impact are well documented.
But there are distances to cover in this healthcare journey.
In this context, I would like to bring to your kind attention a report of the World Health Organisation and the World Bank Group.
The report brings out a few alarming facts.
For one, 400 million people worldwide do not have access to essential health services.
And then, six percent of people in low and middle income group countries are forced into extreme poverty burdened by their expenditure on personal health.
These grim findings are indicative of the fact that improvements in health and economic conditions are mutually reinforcing.
We must, therefore, continue investing in improvements in the health sector.
One of the key components will be adequate and wider dispersal of trained human resources.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
These are aimed at raising the quality of nursing education and creating paths for professional advancement in line with national, regional and global health needs.
New technologies are now available for monitoring progress in all aspects of training and capacity building.
I am confident that these new measures will go a long way in achieving the desired results.
I wish the meritorious nursing professionals of our country, who have been honoured today, all success in their careers.
Let me also express my deep appreciation for the efforts of the Health Minister and his Ministry for their encouragement to the nursing community through awards and similar programmes and initiatives.
Best of luck for the future!
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
It marks not only our technological innovations but their successful commercialization making the fruits of painstaking research available to the people at large.
We are now working towards a technological revolution aimed at empowering millions of our countrymen.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The youth of our country are brimming with ideas and enterprise.
They are harnessing technology to find solutions to day-to-day problems of the common man.
Ingenuity aided by technology can bring substantial welfare benefits.
With an estimated 4,300 start-ups, India is the third largest start-up eco-system in the world today.
Their technology-cum-business models are already solving some of the vexed problems that citizens face in their day-to-day lives.
Some unique solutions introduced by them include delivery of medicines and groceries; expanding the budget hotel market; providing affordable and quick healthcare services, education and agricultural technology; and language learning.
Their products are disrupting their respective industries in a positive way.
Given the growing mobile penetration in the country, start-ups are beginning to come up in sectors ranging from handicrafts, education, agriculture, tourism and transportation.
The jobs created by these start-ups and the markets they serve are acting as instruments of inclusive growth.
I have no doubt the Indian market and the society at large has the appetite to absorb the huge potential of start-ups promises.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This will help us reap the benefits of a favourable demographic transition currently underway.
It will also help provide direct and effective intervention to uplift the quality of life among millions of marginalised citizens.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I hope to see more and more entrepreneurial talent spreading their wings and creating innovative product solutions for a growing market.
TheStand-Up India scheme will aid in mobilizing the large reservoir of untapped potential among women and the under-privileged sections.
These schemes, to my mind, have the potential to trigger another round of socio-economic transformation, similar to the initiatives of last decade when rights to job, education and food were provided, backed by legal guarantees.Start-Up IndiaStand-Up India
It requires the contribution and eager participation of stakeholders at various levels.
On the occasion of the National Technology Day, I urge you all to take a pledge to make sustained efforts in this direction.Digital IndiaMake-in-India
By placing a premium on novelty and creative thought, we can spur common citizens to find innovative answers to important socio-economic challenges of our times.
I appeal to all our countrymen to rise to the occasion and make innovation a way of life.
I wish you all Godspeed and success in your endeavours.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Therefore, this growth momentum is definitely strong positive signals.
Several another macro-economic parameters clearly demonstrate the strength of our economy.
Such as food inflation is largely contained due to substantial supply management.
Industrial sector, though under stress in the face of weak global and domestic demand, is showing some signs of recovery with a 2 percent growth in February this year.
The government is firmly committed to healthy fiscal management.
As this particularly significant as Nelson Mandela for the first time as Head of the State of South Africa attended the conference of the Commonwealth Heads of Government.
Though we may be separated by geographical distances, our co-operation has, in recent years, become increasingly multifaceted, dynamic and rewarding.
In 2013, our bilateral trade crossed one billion US dollars.
However, given the relative size of our economies and the wide convergence of interests in many areas, we both agree that the present level of trade and investment needs to be vigorously advanced in order to realise its substantial potential.
We would very much like to enhance our bilateral co-operation in these areas, learn from the successful experience and practices of New Zealand and collaborate with you in creating new and innovative products and technology.
India looks forward to new partnerships with New Zealand in areas of common interest.
Excellency, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,
Both our countries are active participants in regional and international fora and have worked together in close cooperation on matters of shared interest and concern.
We both recognize the imperatives of strengthening the UN system and other international organizations.
We would like to see them reformed so that they remain relevant and effective in addressing the challenges that confront the world today.
In this context, India stands ready to shoulder greater responsibilities in the international arena.
In the United Nations Security Council, New Zealand has addressed issues of global security and highlighted the challenges faced by smaller states.
We look forward to enhanced cooperation between our two countries both in the regional as well as global context.
Our people to people contacts are growing.
Indian students are increasingly opting for higher studies in New Zealand and we are seeing enhanced tourist flows in both directions.
India deeply appreciates New Zealand's support for India as a member of a reformed and expanded UN Security Council.
We have been working together in regional and multilateral fora on this and other key issues including disarmament, climate change and sustainable development.
Going forward, as we pursue our bilateral dialogue and implement our decisions, I am confident that we can open more doors to each other as we establish a robust trade, economic and political partnership.
Thank you!
Jai Hind!
Discussions between the two leaders were marked by warmth and a shared desire to enhance the ties of friendship and cooperation that define the relationship between the two countries and their peoples.
BILATERAL RELATIONS
The Governor General, Sir Michael Ogio and President Pranab Mukherjee exchanged views on bilateral, regional and multilateral issues of mutual interest.
Both leaders underlined the close and friendly bilateral ties, which are deep rooted in history and which hold great promise for the future.
The wide ranging and constructive discussions were held in a most cordial atmosphere.
The Governor General, Grand Chief Sir Michael Ogio, reiterated his Government's support for India's candidature for Permanent Membership of the United Nations Security Council (UNSC), especially in light of the constructive role played by India in different multilateral fora and in recognition of India's continuous support for the issues that are central to the concerns of Small Island Developing States.
Both leaders expressed confidence that Papua New Guinea with its abundant natural resources and India with its managerial and technical expertise presented complementarities which could be built upon for the mutual benefit of the two countries.
They recognized that there exists great synergy and potential for increased cooperation between the two countries.
Papua New Guinea looks forward to greater investments and larger trade volumes with India.
Both sides agreed to expedite the conclusion of a Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement (IPPA) to facilitate investments.
Both leaders agreed to enhance bilateral relations in the economic, security, defence, education and health sectors.
Both leaders further agreed to establish a mechanism for regular consultations between the Foreign Ministries of both countries aimed at diversifying and further strengthening bilateral cooperation in areas of shared interest.
In order to promote greater mutual understanding and to strengthen people-to-people contacts, and India has extended visa-on-arrival facility for the nationals of all Pacific Island Countries with effect from 2015.
In a gesture of reciprocity, the Government of Papua New Guinea announced the facility of visa on arrival for Indian tourists travelling to Papua New Guinea.
Both leaders also witnessed signing of the Memorandums of Understanding on Agriculture Research Cooperation between University of Technology, Lae, Papua New Guinea and the Indian Council of Agricultural Research.
The two sides finalised and signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for broad ranging cooperation in the Health sector.
An MOU for an Indian line of credit of US$ 100 million for development of infrastructure in PNG was also signed during the visit.
Both leaders welcomed the signing of another MoU under which India will set up a Centre of Excellence in Information Technology in Papua New Guinea.
The Honorable President of India announced that his Government would provide retro-viral drugs and equipment for the treatment of 20,000 HIV patients in Papua New Guinea for one year.
In response to this gesture of goodwill, the Governor General thanked the President of India on behalf of the people of Papua New Guinea.
FORUM FOR INDIA AND PACIFIC ISLANDS COOPERATION (FIPIC)
The leaders agreed that the Forum for India and Pacific Islands Cooperation (FIPIC) Summit has been highly successful in strengthening the interaction between India and the Pacific region.
They welcomed the new intiatives and expressed satisfaction at the progress so far.
MARITIME SECURITY
Both sides discussed bilateral cooperation in the area of maritime security.
Papua New Guinea welcomed India's offer of a coastal surveillance radar system and coast guard patrol vessels.
DISASTER MANAGEMENT
Both sides further agreed to promote bilateral collaboration in disaster management.
In this regard, both leaders noted the endorsement by the Regional Integrated Multi-Hazard Early Warnings Systems (RIMES) Council in July 2015 of the establishment of the RIMES Sub-Regional Hub for monitoring earthquake/tsunami and extreme weather patterns and climatic conditions in Papua New Guinea and the Pacific Region in Papua New Guinea with support from the Government of India.
TERRORISM
The two leaders unequivocally condemned terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and called upon all states to reject the use of terrorism as an instrument of state policy.
Both leaders agreed to cooperate in building an international consensus against support and financing of terrorist organisations.
The two sides agreed to strengthen cooperation in multilateral fora in combating terrorism in all its manifestations and for the early adoption of India's proposal for a Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism in the United Nations.
HUMAN RESOURCES AND SKILLS DEVELOPMENT
The Honourable President reiterated India's commitment to assist Papua New Guinea in capacity building and human resource development.
India also offered to share its advanced techniques and technologies in the agriculture sector.
In this connection, the leaders welcomed the MoU between the Indian Council for Agricultural Research and the Papua New Guinea University of Technology, Lae.
ENERGY SECURITY
Keeping in view India's desire to achieve energy security, Papua New Guinea agreed to develop new avenues of cooperation with India in exploration and development of Papua New Guinea's vast oil and gas resources through joint ventures and Indian public and private sector investment in new and existing projects.
CONCLUSION
He invited the Governor General and the Prime Minister to visit India at a mutually convenient date.
The invitations were accepted.
Distinguished members of the Faculty, Dear Students, Ladies and Gentlemen,
It gives me great pleasure to be here amidst you this morning.
I am touched by the warmth of the reception accorded to me and to my delegation since my arrival at your beautiful country.
We bring to you the best wishes of the people of India.
Mahatma Gandhi, the Father of the Indian Nation continues, to this day, to be revered all over the world as a beacon of peace and apostle of non-violence.
His vision and teachings remind humanity of the true values of harmonious co-existence and mutual respect and the need to work together for the equality and freedom of all individuals.
In a world that is increasingly vexed by intolerance and extremism, the life and message of this great man remain an inspiring example of the power of truth and universal brotherhood.
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I have just had the honour of planting a sapling of a banyan tree to mark my visit to this University.
I have no doubt that as it grows and spreads its branches, this tree will signify the enduring friendship between people of India and people of Papua New Guinea.
Gandhiji had viewed education as an integrated approach to all round personality development.
We, in India, have tried to adhere to these principles as we pursue our goals in the education sector through our national planning and human resource development programmes.
As we succeed, India has always been happy to share her technical expertise with other developing countries.
At the Second Summit of the Forum for India-Pacific Islands Co-operationheld in Delhi and Jaipur in August last year, we had announced the doubling of the number of scholarships earmarked for students from the Pacific Island Countries under our Indian Technical and Economic Co-operation Programme.
I invite more students from Papua New Guinea to take advantage of these schemes and attend our institutions of higher education and centres of excellence.
The Indian higher academic system was known the world over in past.
There were some seats of higher learning like Nalanda, Takshashila, Vikramashila, Valabhi, Somapura and Odantapuri which dominated the world higher education system for almost eighteen hundred years from the beginning of the sixth century BC till 12th century AD.
They attracted scholars from far and wide.
University of Taxila was confluence of four civilizations.
There are 730 universities, 13500 colleges, 16 Indian Institute of Technologies and 30 National Institute of Technologies.
Two Indian institutions are placed within the top 200 universities in the global ranking system.
Two others are ranked within the top 20 young universities in the world.
Friends,
Even though India is separated from this region by the oceans and continents, we attach high value to the close friendship that exists between India and the island countries of the Pacific Ocean.
These bonds have contributed to the mutual understanding between our Governments and our peoples and are at the root of our shared desire to collaborate in areas of our common interest.
The cooperation between our two countries at the United Nations and other multilateral fora has also been close and fruitful.
At the present time, seven decades after the United Nations was created, we are agreed on the urgent need for reform of its organs to make them relevant and effective in the significantly altered world of the 21st century.
These were aimed at supporting their efforts towards their developmental goals and aspirations and addressing their specific concerns related to climate change and sustainable development.
India stands ready to share other knowledge and experience in the field of renewable energy, sustainable agriculture and best practices for increasing food productivity.
There are many complementarities between India and Papua New Guinea - on which our bilateral cooperation must be based.
We are focussed on skills development and innovation with special emphasis on simple and cost effective technologies that are easily adapted to be locally relevant, efficient and successful.
Our public sector enterprises and our private sector are keen to work with Papua New Guinea in harnessing its mineral, marine and hydrocarbon resources.
As we identify the areas where we would both like to focus our joint efforts, I would say that in this area of cooperation the sky is the limit.
We should waste no time in bringing the benefit of our cooperation to our peoples.
Before I conclude, young students, a few words for your success in future endeavours:
With these words, I extend to you and, through you, to the people of Papua New Guinea, my heartfelt thanks for this memorable visit.
May the friendship between our nations grow from strength to strength!
Thank you.
Your Excellency, Sir Michael Ogio,
Governor General of Papua New Guinea,
It is a privilege for me to make this historic journey to Papua New Guinea - the first-ever State Visit by any Indian President to this beautiful country.
Excellency, let me begin by thanking you for the warm hospitality accorded to me and members of my delegation.
I am accompanied by Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Balyan, Union Minister of State in the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare and senior Members of the Indian Parliament representing different political parties and different regions of India.
I am deeply touched by the graciousness of your hospitality and the friendship of your people.
We bring the good wishes of the people of India and a deep commitment to energising our relationship.
Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen, it was as early as the 8th Century AD that Indians first came to Papua.
They were welcomed as friends.
Today, the greater percentage of them are well educated professionals and businessmen whose contribution has been valued and appreciated.
I take this opportunity to thank you and the successive generations of your people who have made them feel comfortable and secure in this beautiful land.
Excellency, both our nations are bound by our common experience of colonial rule.
Since independence, we have charted individual paths and traversed many hurdles to achieve economic progress.
We now seek to work together as reliable partners to achieve our common aspirations of peace and security, prosperity and sustainable development in our regions.
We have achieved this by developing high yielding varieties of seeds and improved methods and techniques of agriculture, dairy and poultry farming.
Whether it is complex software and high precision equipment for our space and nuclear-power industry, or technology for harnessing renewable energy from the sun and wind, we have, today, developed advanced capabilities.
India would be happy to share experience and knowledge and expertise with the people of Papua New Guinea.
Excellency, you are blessed with fertile soil, lands rich in natural resources and abundant marine wealth.
Our public and private sector are keen to join you in exploring your gas and oil reserves, establishing downstream industries and developing the infrastructure that you require in the different sectors of your growing economy.
We have much to offer.
The shifting of the centre of gravity of the global economy to this region is another compelling reason for our intensified co-operation in sectors of common interest.
Excellency, during his visit to this region in 2014, Prime Minister of India, Shri Narendra Modi, had articulated the vision of my Government to build an enduring partnership between our nations and our peoples.
We consider our co-operation with the Islands of the Pacific to be a key component of our Act East Policy.
A number of initiatives announced at the first FIPIC Summit have borne fruit and India remains committed to this process.
Excellency, I would once again like to thank you and say what a pleasure it is for me, personally, to be here.
I take this opportunity to most cordially invite you to visit India and also to the Prime Minister for another visit to India.
Thank you!
Ladies and Gentlemen, I invite you to join me in raising a toast:
At the outset, let me compliment the Department of Commerce for organizing this unique and far-sighted event in collaboration with the Confederation of Indian Industry and the Services Export Promotion Council.
It is heartening to note that delegates from all service sectors and twelve foreign countries are participating in this event.
To my mind, this is an important platform for the Indian services industry, especially in view of the growing relevance and importance of the Services Sector.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
There exists a positive correlation between the extent of liberalization and growth in different service subsectors in India.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In fact, it includes all sectors, which contribute to the well being of a citizen.
We enjoy natural advantages when it comes to services sector due to our beneficial demographic profile.
For India, thus, services sector will remain the key driver of economic growth.
Economies round the globe depend greatly on their attainments in sectors such as IT, creativity and innovation, design, R&D and professional services.
The IT sector has positioned India globally as a major services hub, becoming a major exporter of IT, BPO and software services.
With over 4,300 technology start-ups in the country, India has emerged as the third largest start-up eco-system in the world.
The IT sector has become a true success story for the Indian services sector.
We need to replicate this success across multiple sectors.
In the years to come, the service sector will be one the largest generator of employment opportunities in India.
To realize their full potential, the tourism and hospitality industries need consistent support of policy initiatives and development of requisite infrastructure.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is now incumbent upon the business leaders to seize this opportunity.
The synergy between government and industry can make India achieve significant socio-economic transformation.
You all in the service sector have a larger responsibility on your shoulders to become co-partners in the success story of Indian economic development.
The sector in its wide outreach can surpass geographical boundaries and unite nations through the common thread of offering skills and capabilities under its umbrella.
The event is likely to give sea of opportunities to all stakeholders to articulate their ideas and draw out an action plan to make the service sector vibrant, sustainable and a driving force of our economy.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I hope that during the next three days, the delegates will have fruitful deliberations to discuss business initiatives; forge strategic alliances and lay a roadmap for exponential growth of the service sector of the Indian economy.
Wishing you Godspeed in your endeavours!
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
A wide array of seminal topics, such as, impact of contemporary developments on Rule of Law, Human Rights, Administration of Justice and Judicial Systems in India were discussed in those retreats.
I hope these Retreats will be institutionalized and held regularly in the future.
Distinguished Judges, ladies and gentlemen,
It helps maintaining the social order by swiftly and effectively dealing with those on the wrong side of the law.
As an upholder of the Rule of Law and enforcer of the right to liberty, the role of the Judiciary is sacrosanct.
The faith and confidence people have reposed in the Judiciary is testimony to the fact that the Judiciary has since 1950 responded to the need of the hour.
For justice to have meaning to the people, it must be accessible, affordable and quick.
The Constitution also recognises it and sets out the noble objective of securing justice to all the citizens of India, be it social, economical or political.
Distinguished Judges, ladies and gentlemen,
This has not been merely an exercise in interpretation of laws or legal order, much less an exercise in edifying jurisprudence; it has captured the ethos of our developing society as it has evolved from the colonial shackles to a social order replete with the essence of human dignity, of aspirations of a populace maturing into a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic republic as mandated by the makers of our Constitution.
Judicial review is part of the basic structure and cannot be altered even by amending the Constitution.
It is the judiciary which ensures the effectiveness of Judicial Review.
The independence and integrity of our judiciary is therefore of the highest importance not only to the judges but also to people at large who seek judicial redress against perceived legal injury or executive excess.
It has been made possible for courts to permit anyone with sufficient interest and actingbona fideto maintain an action for judicial redress, and to activate the judicial process.
In the support of rights, courts have found a post card or newspaper article to be material enough to set-off judicial action.
This has helped to bring justice closer to the common man.locus standibona fide
Each organ of our democracy must function within its own sphere and must not take over what is assigned to the others.
The balance of power between the three organs of the state is enshrined in our Constitution.
The Constitution is supreme.
The equilibrium in the exercise of authority must be maintained at all times.
The exercise of powers by the legislature and executive is subject to judicial review.
However, the only check possible in the exercise of powers by the judiciary is self-imposed discipline and self-restraint by the judiciary itself.
Distinguished Judges, ladies and gentlemen,
Justice delayed is justice denied.
I am sure a paradigm shift in the way the public perceives the legal system will come through persistent efforts by Judges to clear case backlogs and reduce life cycles of cases.
This must be taken as an opportunity to bring in innovation in speedy dispensation of justice.
Use of IT and e-governance can make a positive impact in this regard.
ICT enablement of courts through the eCourts Project has facilitated availability of court and case data through the National Judicial Data Grid so that litigants and lawyers benefit from the availability of case information online.
I hope our Courts and Judges will continue to remain active supporters as well as beneficiaries of all efforts aimed at E-governance.
I am told that out of a sanctioned strength of 1065 judges in all the High Courts, the working strength of High Court judges throughout the country as on April 12, 2016 was only 636.
This amounts to vacancy of 429 judges.
Stated otherwise, our High Courts are working with about 60 per cent of the sanctioned capacity.
Since the assumption of work of Collegium from the first week of January, 2016 total 145appointments were made as on 12.4.2016.
This shows the speed with which the collegium is now functioning and I request Honourable Judges to maintain this tempo.
They, thereby, contribute towards the cooperation necessary and indeed inevitable, across different legal systems so as to ensure that society, the State and economy are not hampered by differences in legal systems.
The inevitability of cooperation across nations and across legal systems demands understanding both from the Courts and legislature of the global village we live in.
Distinguished Judges, ladies and gentlemen,
I welcome all of you to Rashtrapathi Bhavan.
You are entering into a long service career.
At the beginning of that career you have all my best wishes.
I wish success in your endeavour.
Despite economic slowdown across the globe, we have registered the highest GDP growth in last fiscal.
We must graduate to be self-reliant in weapon system and armaments so that we can build a safe, secure and progressive nation of our dream.
Let us build this nation together with hard work, sincerity and innovation through the time tested values of the nation.
The Ordnance Factories must lead these initiatives.
Tomorrowbelongs to you.
Your commitment to national goals will determine the direction of our future growth.
As you get ready to embark on the journey to fulfil your dreams, let me share with you my own little checklist for nation-building.
- We work more than we idle; and
- We think more than we talk.
You may just find thischecklist useful.
I would in particular like to compliment DPE and SCOPE for recognizing Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) for the efforts put in by them and their achievements in inculcating leadership qualities.
I compliment the DPE & SCOPE for their proactive role in taking new initiatives to revamp and reinvent public sector management policies aimed at ensuring sustained long term development of CPSEs, enhanced autonomy to PSU Boards, Corporate Governance and CSR.
In this context, the CPSEs may like to consider taking up a common cause or issue aimed at upliftment of the country under their CSR action plan every year.
This would possibly result in optimum utilization of available resources while at the same time allowing CPSEs the flexibility to choose different common causes to be undertaken under CSR every year depending upon the broader thrust areas identified by Government.
CPSEs need to take immediate steps to identify and unlock the surplus land available with them as the same can be used in generating much needed public investments to boost the economy and increase employment opportunities.
There is a similar need for identifying and unlocking the free surplus reserves which are available with our CPSEs so that the same may be utilized for undertaking enhanced capital expenditure.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The financial, technical and manpower resources of our CPSEs need to be shared to enable better and more optimal solutions in increasingly customer driven markets.
The exceptional human capital available with CPSEs should be harnessed to develop suitable strategies and interventions which lead to improvement in performance and expansion of operations both in domestic and global markets.
It is heartening to note that CPSEs have continued to be model employers and have maintained ethical standards in their operations in the face of ever increasing competition.
It, therefore, gives me immense pleasure to see SCOPE awarding a special citation for Outstanding Woman Manager in CPSEs, thus promoting and applauding the role of women executives in the Public Sector.
It is also heartening to note that various programmes are being organized for the growth and development of women employees in CPSEs.
I am particularly glad that given the competitive environment, the PSEs undertook significant initiatives for upscaling technologies and capacities in order to operate at par with their private counterparts in a progressively liberalizing economy.
The continued efforts at excellence have helped several of our PSEs become self-reliant and play a critical role in building the Indian economy.
The Government remains committed to the India growth story and to progressive macro-level consolidation, both on the fiscal and monetary fronts.
I am confident that all of you shall work even harder in future to fulfill the expectations of our vast populace.
I once again compliment SCOPE for instituting the SCOPE Excellence Award to identify and recognize excellent performance in CPSEs.
This will be a motivation to all employees for bettering their performance and attaining the highest levels of efficiency.
Thank you!!
Jai Hind
I am told that the main objective of this trust is to work for the weaker sections of society and for women empowerment.
It will undertake activities for the upliftment of the poor and needy, using education as the primary tool of development.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
During his tenure, Arjun Singhji restored peace and harmony in the state of Punjab.
He remained Governor till November 1985, after which he came to Delhi.
He later served as the Minister of Communications from October 1986 to February 1988.
Thereafter, he again became the Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh for about a year in 1988-89.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Subsequently, he was elected to the Rajya Sabha twice, in the year 2000 and in 2006.
He again became the Human Resource Development Minister in the Dr. Manmohan Singh Cabinet, which he served with distinction for five years from 2004 to 2009.
With over eight years, Arjun Singh ji perhaps had the longest tenure as Human Resource Development Minister after Maulana Abul Kalam Azad.
The education landscape in our country naturally had a considerable imprint of the policies that Arjun Singhji had pursued.
Today, the number of universities in India are 730 and there are 36000 degree giving colleges.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
A different scenario is noticeable today.
Many meritorious Indian students pursue their higher studies from foreign universities.
It is ironical that our higher education system, which is capable of producing world-class scholars, loses them to foreign universities.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I have been repeating in my interactions with institutions of higher learning that the rankings process must be accorded due importance.
I am happy that good results have flowed since.
Two other Indian institutions have been ranked within the top 20 small universities in the world by another international agency.
I hope this trend will continue and we will soon attract mighty minds from all over world.
Our institutions must pursue excellence in every sphere of academic activity, be it teaching, evaluation, research or project work.
To make learning more effective, teaching pedagogy must be refined, curricula up-dated regularly, an inter-disciplinary approach adopted and evaluation mechanism reformed.
Physical infrastructure must be improved.
To create quality consciousness, every institution must be benchmarked and accredited.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Setting up industry-interface cell can accelerate these activities.
Our future growth will result not so much from the utilization of our resources with existing technology than from its better usage through more advanced technology.
Unfortunately, investment in research in our country is lacking.
R&D expenditure as percentage of GDP is a mere 0.8 percent in India.
Compared to that, it is 3.6 percent in Japan, 2.7 percent in the US and 2.0 percent in China.
Higher academic and research institutions must be the hotbeds of research activity.
Building a sound research eco-system calls for a slew of measures like collaborative partnerships and better financial incentives for attracting and retaining research talent.
To imbibe a scientific temper and a spirit of inquiry in students, research at the under-graduate level must be promoted.
These developmental challenges call for an inspired response from the higher education system.
It is incumbent on them to mould students into responsible human beings.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This is a core philosophy that must continue undeterred.
Plurality of our society has come about through assimilation of ideas over centuries.
The multiplicity in culture, faith and language is what makes India special.
We derive our strength from tolerance.
There are divergent strands in public discourse.
We may argue.
We may not agree.
But we cannot deny the essential prevalence of multiplicity of opinion.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
A phenomenon seen in recent times is the way the common man is engaged with affairs of the nation.
While we must wield no space to anarchy, efficient democratic machinery must have the means and wherewithal to absorb public opinion for formulation of sound policies.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
He never lost his simplicity to power, nor did he lose his concern for the common man.
This would be the most fitting tribute to his work.
My good wishes to the family and well wishers involved in setting up the Foundation!
Thank you.
This is an opportunity for us to honor individuals and teams of scientists for their outstanding achievements and contributions in the field of fundamental and applied geosciences, mining and allied areas.
I congratulate all of you on your success and achievements.
Over the years, the society has made advancements in various fields ranging from agriculture, industry, infrastructure, electronics and energy to space technology through the innovative use of materials sourced from our mother earth.
We cannot imagine our world today without the use of natural resources.
Availability and use of minerals in any country has been one of the factors determining self-sufficiency of its economy.
At the same time, we must understand that sustenance of mankind depends only on environmentally sustainable mining practices.
Our effort to use our natural resources should be informed by the dangers of natural and manmade disasters.
I am happy to note that the Geoscientists of the country are working hard to meet these challenges.
The diverse fields work of the awardees are testimony to this inherent spread of the geoscientific developments in the country.
The awardees with us today represent the entire spectrum of geoscientific community - the National Organizations, Research Institutions and the Academic Institutes.
This bears testimony to the fact that geoscience in the country is being practiced across the community with passion and dedication.
The honour associated with these awards has inspired the geoscientific community to strive to reach the highest standards of scientific achievements.
The IGC will be hosted in the Indian sub-continent after a gap of 56 years and will be an excellent opportunity for you to showcase your work to the global geoscience community.
I am sure the Indian geoscientific community will rise to the occasion and we will also see significant contribution from them in this global geoscientific Olympiad.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The technological progress the country has achieved in recent times has been phenomenal.
At the same time, the expectations from the geoscientific community to continue their good work have also increased many folds.
The goals have to be set high and persistent efforts are required to achieve them.
As the search for the near surface deposits have reached a point of saturation, the geoscientists of the country now face the crucial challenge of finding deep seated and concealed mineral resources.
There is a need to focus on exploration of the offshore mineral resources which hold enormous potential of supplementing the increasing needs of the society.
Similarly, it is also important to find strategic and rare earth elements to support Space and Information Technology Missions of the Nation to ensure self-reliance of the Nation in these fields.
However, all of this needs to be accomplished with the environmental sustainability concern in mind.
I am sure, you all will take up the challenge and bring about innovative ways to unravel the concealed treasure.
The Mines & Minerals (Development & Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015 has introduced transparent and competitive auctioning process for grant of mineral concessions.
This will also enable the States to get an enhanced share of the value of mineral resources.
Provisions have been made to ensure certainty of tenure and easy transferability of mineral concession.
To accelerate mineral exploration activity in the country, a National Mineral Exploration Trust (NMET) has been set up.
Given the limits on enhancing the availability of utilizable water resources and increased variability in supplies due to climate change, meeting the future needs will depend more on demand management.
Therefore, a holistic and inter-disciplinary approach at water related problems is required.
Hazard profiles have changed dramatically in recent years, due to changes in both our perception of geological hazards with long recurrence times, as well as actual changes driven by climate change.
The potential consequences are also changing rapidly.
The rising population and urbanization is leading to increased concentrations of vulnerable people in areas exposed to natural hazards.
The Geoscientists have to respond to challenges by devising new, actionable strategies to increase the resilience of the vulnerable communities from natural disasters and risks related with climate change.
Dear Awardees,
You will agree, this would not have been possible without support and cooperation from your families and dear ones whose sacrifices have ensured your continued, undivided attention to the subject.
I extend my heartiest appreciation to all those who have tirelessly worked in advancing the frontiers of scientific knowledge and its application towards nation building.
Jai Hind.
From my brief observation, I find that this campus represents a clean, green and serene setting for imparting higher education.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Friends:
Today, this institute provides quality higher education in medicine, para-medical sciences, nursing, engineering and management.
It serves the rural masses comprising more than 1,200 villages of Uttarakhand.
It focuses on health, education, and income generation programmes.
It provides tertiary care services through its 750 bedded multi-specialty hospital and state-of-the-art 250 bedded Cancer centre.
It will also serve as a model for replication in areas with under-served populations.
SRHU is taking all steps necessary to align itself to international standards in the delivery of quality education.
Its Department of Medical Education was designated in 2014 as a Regional Medical Education Training Centre by the Medical Council of India.
This unit is involved in faculty development programmes and the development of innovative teaching and assessment tools.
Friends:
It is therefore incumbent on higher educational institutions to provide quality education to transform the entire education system.
The demographic dividend that we talk about will fructify if we can provide the growing number of our youth good education, knowledge and skills.
Mere expansion of higher education by establishing more centres of higher learning is not enough.
Unless we take care of quality, the objective of preparing young minds into capable, confident and committed individuals will not be met.
An all-out effort to maintain good standards in our higher academic institutions is required, be it in developing the faculty, nurturing core competencies, establishing linkages with other institutions, networking with the industry, or focusing on research and innovation.
The research areas should be prioritized so as to solve specific socio-economic problems.
The higher education system should produce sound professionals with a strong social sensitivity.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In real life, you graduate every day.
It is a never ending process as you learn new things from your occupation and imbibe other qualities from your life experiences.
Old ideas and approaches that no longer serve any purpose should give way to better ideas.
I hope your dreams take you...
To the windows of your opportunities,
And to the most special places your heart has ever known.
Spread your fragrance and judge yourself not by your accomplishments, but by the happiness of the people around you.
Wish you godspeed in your endeavours!
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Young friends, ladies and gentlemen:
It may have promoted the development of a scientific bent of mind and temperament amongst its citizens, especially the young ones.
However, unless the young minds are sensitized to the need for finding creative solutions to top-ranging socio-economic problems of our country, the goal of inclusive development will remain elusive.
One of the Roundtables was on the theme of social innovations for large scale change.
The agenda and the themes of the Festival of Innovation have attempted to build inter-linkages amongst various stakeholders essential for an inclusive society based on inclusive innovations and technologies.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I understand these four winning entries will be in public domain, which will be free for use by anyone.
I compliment the organizers and the participants for putting open innovation into practice.
I like to urge upon the winners of this event to work closely with relevant stakeholders and ensure that the applications created by them are widely used to usher in societal transformation.
Young friends, ladies and gentlemen:
Today on an average, a student and a teacher spends around half an hour daily on attendance.
This is the time which could have been utilized productively for teaching and would have increased learning hours in schools and colleges.
Finding a solution for an intelligent attendance system is particularly crucial in a scenario of shortage of teachers and faculty which most educational institutions in our country experience.
If we can save precious time, we can definitely contribute to enhancing the quality of the education system.
I would not like to further elaborate as the applications developed in each of the areas have already been described by the winners.
I hope each one of you to keep contributing to social causes through the use of modern technology.
Remember that it is in your mindset and skill-set that the task of transforming our country rests.
Make yourselves the worthy sons and daughters of this great nation!
I now declare the Festival of Innovation 2016 closed.
Thank you.
This Round-table is a part of the ongoing Festival of Innovations 2016.
Through credit support, institution development and other activities, NABARD has been promoting sustainable and equitable agriculture, and rural prosperity.
As the principal financial institution for the promotion, financing and development of the MSME sector, it has been contributing to production, jobs and exports in no small measure.
These two entities have a key part to play in an innovation-filled India.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It facilitates growth and creates job opportunities.
Innovation holds great promise in uplifting the living standards of people.
A novel idea if transformed into a useful product can usher in progress for the society.
But the path to convert novelties into new products or services is riddled with challenges.
A well laid-out structure exists for conventional enterprises to access resources from the market including financial institutions.
But in the case of innovation-led entrepreneurial set-ups, there are unique circumstances that cause certain constraints.
For one, innovation-oriented firms mainly have intangible assets in the form of knowledge base embedded in human capital.
Distinguished participants:
Investors prefer a proven business model before investing and scaling it up.
Innovation-based projects have a high degree of uncertainty.
It is not only difficult to ascertain the probability of their desired outcomes; even the form of the outcome is hard to predict.
The true potential of any innovation activity cannot be gauged clearly at the start.
These early stage activities result in sunk costs being incurred leading to negative cash flows for the nascent firm.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is, however, the preliminary stage which posits a bigger challenge for innovators, entrepreneurs, financiers and policy-makers alike.
To my mind, there has to be a hybrid model rather than a one-stop solution for financing of innovations.
We cannot allow the many innovations taking place at grassroots level to languish for want of financial support.
I have said earlier that the trinity of innovator, entrepreneur and financier has to be linked through a strong network mechanism.
A cooperative spirit can help in the flowering of many budding ideas.
Distinguished participants:
Banks and other financial institutions, over and above their financing function, can also play a facilitatory role in this regard.
They can help innovators tie up with entrepreneurs interested in their ideas and with relevant institutions for assistance on validation, design, market feasibility, and setting up of enterprise.
They can identify a pool of mentors to assess and meet the needs of innovators.
Many of these central institutions have also established innovation incubators for ideas-to-market transformation.
Banks and other financial institutions may join hands with these innovation clubs and incubators for greater synergy.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) is being set up as a platform involving academics, entrepreneurs and researchers to foster a culture of innovation and promote a network of world-class innovation hubs.
Funds for promoting innovation have also been launched by industry bodies, corporate players and educational institutions.
NABARD has a Rural Innovation Fund to support innovative, risk-friendly and unconventional experiments in farm, non-farm and micro-finance sectors.
Let me thank the representatives from the banking and financial sectors for their enthusiastic participation in this platform.
All the concerned agencies must consider the recommendations that have emerged from the deliberations and start working on them.
I once again compliment the National Innovation Foundation, along with NABARD and SIDBI, for organizing this fruitful dialogue on financing of innovation.
Wish you all the very best for the future!
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
It also offers a ready platform to discuss the emerging opportunities; policy challenges, regulatory framework and international best practices to develop long term sustainable business relationships to catalyze further growth.
The stakeholders can draw out an action plan to make India as a hub for manufacturing, maintenance and operation for aerospace Industry.
This will make India as a manufacturing hub of aerospace industry.
It will also promote latest international best practices; explore the possibilities of long term sustainable public private partnerships and forge new alliances.
I hope that this platform shall usher a new era in the strategic partnerships and collaboration in the Indian civil aviation sector to make India as a hub of world class aerospace technology and services.
Jai Hind
Good Evening and a warm welcome to Rashtrapati Bhavan!
These Awards are a recognition of your years of sincere effort and hard work.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Countries that have created strong networks amongst higher educational institutions and with other key stakeholders like industry and research bodies have experienced rapid innovation, product development and industrialization.
In the process, it has led to generation of knowledge, wealth and welfare for the people.
My Secretariat was quick to process the implementation of the Awards, and in 2015, the first Awards were given.
I congratulate the leadership of Tezpur University for their accomplishment and wish to see it achieve even greater heights in future.
I compliment the members of the award-winning teams for their excellent work and wish them continued success and progress in their areas of research and innovation.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I took some time to understand the role of the President as the Visitor.
I also took time to grasp the status of higher education in our country.
I found not a single Indian institution in the top 200 global rankings despite the potential that many institutions exhibited.
It was the lack of focus and the absence of a methodological approach that denied this distinction to any of our institutions.
Good results have started to come in.
Two Indian institutions figure for the first time in the list of the top 200 universities in the world published by one renowned international rating agency.
In the ranking of small universities made by another reputed international agency, IIT Guwahati has been placed at the twelfth position.
This is a unique achievement and should inspire all our institutions including those that have been set up in recent years.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
To my mind, the most critical amongst them are ensuring the quality of education and research, enhancing faculty standards, and establishing collaborations / linkages with international as well as domestic organizations.
The emphasis on academic excellence, as well as inculcating core civilizational values of patriotism, compassion, honesty, tolerance, performance of duty and respect for women - has to be maintained all through.
A determining parameter to guide our research priorities is the degree of its relevance to society.
Likewise, innovation activity has to be geared towards the welfare of the common man.
Innovations have to simplify lives, provide relief to the burdened, and offer means of enterprise to the entrepreneurial and the industrious.
You all must work towards becoming temples of knowledge and learning.
I wish you Godspeed in your endeavours.
Thank you.
The High Court building will also complete 100 years of its existence in November 2016.
There is thus a dual purpose to these celebrations in what is one of the largest temples of justice not just in India but the entire world.
Having started functioning with six judges, it now has a sanctioned strength of 160 Judges, making it the biggest in the country.
The Bar of the High Court in 1866 consisted of 6 Advocates.
Its strength today is about 15,000 as per the rolls maintained by the Registry of the High Court.
The rich jurisprudence emerging from this Court has benefited not just the people of Uttar Pradesh but the country at large.
I am happy to know that my distinguished predecessor, Dr. Rajendra Prasad opened the new wing of the High Court in 1954.
President Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan attended the centenary celebrations and President R. Venkataraman attended the 125th year celebrations.
Friends, ladies and gentlemen,
High Courts in particular have a unique position under the Constitution of India.
It must help maintain social order by swiftly and effectively dealing with those on the wrong side of the law.
For justice to have meaning for the people, it must be accessible, affordable and quick.
Though the Indian judiciary has many strengths, it is yet to fully meet the aspirations of our people for speedy and affordable justice.
There are over three crore cases pending in various courts throughout the country.
Out of these about 38.5 lakh cases are pending in 24 High Courts.
Overall, out of a sanctioned strength of 1056 judges in all the High Courts, the working strength of High Court judges throughout the country as on 1stMarch, 2016 was only 591.
Similarly, the sanctioned strength of judicial officers in district and subordinate courts in the country is about 20,500 out of which the working strength is only about 16,000 at present.
Approximately, 9,11,908 cases are pending in this Court as of February 2016, a decline from 10.1 lakh cases in 2014.
I am sure that the Central Government and the State Government will extend all support to theAllahabad High Court in its endeavour to reduce pendencies.
Right incentives must be provided to courts to support the use of ADR and at the same time, litigants should be made aware of the benefits of using ADR mechanisms and motivated to use the same.
Mediation, in particular is an extremely effective tool for resolution of disputes such as matrimonial and property matters.
Greater efforts are also needed to spread legal literacy across the nation and improve the quality of legal education.
Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
To make this programme a success, we need to improve the ease of doing business in our country.
Enforcement of contracts is a key yardstick in measuring the ease of doing business.
The Government and judiciary must work in tandem to reduce costs and time taken fordispute resolution.
These include measures to ensure that trials proceeds on a day to day basis, limiting of unnecessary adjournments, imposition of costs for causing intentional delays and integration of information and communication technology in court processes.
Section 436A has been added to the Code of Criminal Procedure to provide for release of under trial prisoners who have undergone half of the maximum period of imprisonment for the stated offence.
Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am confident the High Court will continue to uphold the basic values of equality, liberty and justice enshrined in our Constitution and safeguard the freedom and fundamental rights of our people so that they realize their full potential as worthy citizens of this great nation.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Innovation and entrepreneurship needs to be inclusive and focus on a variety of enterprises, such as young technology firms, upcoming manufacturing businesses and rural innovator companies.
We, as a nation, need a model that draws in the 350-400 million people who currently reside outside mainstream society.
The launch of the Start-up India programme by the Government indicates our commitment towards harnessing the brilliance and creativity of our young minds for the larger benefit of society and the nation.
I am confident that the recommendations made by the participants of the Roundtable will further help us in concretizing our plan of action.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Addressing high levels of poverty remains critical.
Innovation is a driver of income growth, which under certain conditions benefits everybody in society, but which under different conditions might reinforce social exclusion.
Inclusive innovations often modify existing technologies, products or services to better meet the needs of those groups.
Inclusive innovation will only be successful if it reaches a much larger segment of the poor and excluded population than it currently does.
Scaling up of these processes would require initiatives that are built around: a) financially sustainable business models; and b) participation by lower-income and excluded groups.
Successful entrepreneurs innovate, bring new products and concepts to the market, improve market efficiency, build wealth, create jobs, and enhance economic growth.
While we celebrate the success of several new ventures in e-commerce, information technology and mobile telephony, these will not suffice to deliver our aggregate growth expectations.
India will have to encourage creation of new SMEs focused on manufacturing, while spurring grassroots innovation and growth.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In that context, I had in January this year, the privilege of hosting Indian-American entrepreneurs from the Silicon Valley.
In the presentations that they made before me, the one underlying message that emerged was the need for formulation of a comprehensive policy framework which will encourage investment in innovation, give impetus to research and create an enabling environment for entrepreneurship.
A strong case was presented for creating business dynamism which will allow new firms to scale or fail and make it easy for unproductive firms to exit.
I am confident that these policy interventions will give a new vibrancy to the Indian entrepreneurial landscape.
Our current investment levels in R&D are but a fraction of what world class companies spend.
Even here, the major contributor of R&D expenditure is the Government.
Without a substantive stepping up of these expenditures, we cannot expect to be at the higher end of the value chain.
I take this opportunity to call upon the private sector and institutes of higher learning to devote a larger part of their resources for R&D to enable innovation and job creation across the economy.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I have reiterated this call in the conferences of heads of other central institutes of higher learning held subsequently.
In the last three years, innovation clubs, incubators and hubs have been set up in around 85 central higher educational institutions.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
As I conclude, I would like to leave with you some thoughts on the challenges that we face today in creating a viable entrepreneurial eco-system.
You may, perhaps, like to deliberate on these:
· The challenge of engaging young minds constructively and ensuring that growth is job-led and not jobless.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I am sure that these will result in recommendations which are both focused and goal oriented.
I also take this opportunity to wish you a pleasant stay in Delhi and invite you to visit the famed Mughal Gardens which are currently in bloom.
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
You have just entered into a new career which will give you an opportunity to shoulder immense responsibilities at a young age.
You can serve the nation and the people of the country by serving through the public services.
You have committed yourself to serve the people of this great country, by joining these services.
The role of civil servants is constantly changing in this global scenario.
To meet the increased aspirations of the people you are expected to act as facilitators rather than administrators.
I hope that this effort will lead to financial inclusion of the rural India.
The decision of Department of Posts to install ATM machines and issuance of debit cards shall ensure speedier financial transactions both in rural and urban areas.
The launch of mobile telephony and faster internet network in India has enabled India tap its vast digital potential.
India is emerging as a fast digital hub.
It is an opportunity for you to do introspection as to why the oldest government telecom companies with biggest network are not able to provide requisite quality services.
The dream of a vibrant digital India can come true only if we have a robust high speed communication network.
A reliable and stable postal banking network can make a prosperous and empowered India.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
You should always be fair, equitable and humane in your approach towards the clients.
Jai Hind
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The service owes its origin to a major institutional reform in public financial management undertaken in 1976, that of separation of audit from accounts.
Several Constitutional provisions prescribe for the financial accountability of the Executive to Parliament, and the financial management of the affairs of the Union and the States.
Indian history records the importance given by kingdoms and enlightened rulers towards the better management, custody and control of public finances, and reporting of expenditures and revenues.
The colonial administration designed complex rules and procedures of payment and accounting.
Efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditures did not matter.
That was because most of the funds mobilized were spent on meeting the costs of wages for the army or public servants.
Expenditure on infrastructure within the country, like expanding the railways and road networks was geared to serve the interests of the colonial administration and exploitation of local resources.
The focus of public finance in other words was not development but perpetuating control for keeping the fabric of the Raj together.
Consequently, there have been overall improvements in both the payment and accounting functions of the Union Government, in addition to providing decision makers with high quality, timely reports and analysis of the monthly and annual status of expenditures and revenues.
I recall the launch of the Government e-payment Gateway called GePG in 2011 when I was the Finance Minister that has enabled direct electronic payments to beneficiary accounts in a seamless IT environment.
The system has brought in greater transparency and efficiency in e-payment transactions.
In recent times, the Public Financial Management System (PFMS) portal has further facilitated release of funds by line Ministries through the banking channels to beneficiaries, both within and external to Government with real time MIS inputs.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
This mode of direct transfer of funds to beneficiary bank accounts ensures transparency, eliminates delays and brings about a perceptible drop in corruption levels.
We must continue to harness and leverage our e-governance capabilities for improving the lives of the poor and needy, and to transform India into a more equitable and financially inclusive society.
The size, scale and complexity of the economy is increasing with every passing day, as is its integration with the world economy.
These fast paced developments pose policy and administrative challenges on many fronts, including on the capability and the capacity of our financial management and accounting systems to respond to the myriad needs of various stakeholders in the economy.
In that context, the foremost challenge for your organization is timely and credible financial reporting of public finances, which is the backbone of an efficient and sound financial management system.
I understand that this is only the second time since Independence that both organizations, working in tandem, have been able to achieve this.
This now has to be the norm rather than the exception.
At the same time, fiscal data needs to be presented in a simple and user friendly manner to enable easy comprehension both by parliamentarians and the general public.
I am confident you will work towards this.
The internal audit function today remains largely confined to compliance audit.
Moreover, the focus has to change from compliance to risk management, mitigation and control.
I understand that the Controller General of Accounts has taken several steps towards this end.
This process needs to continue.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Government and its agencies today are repositories of large volumes of financial and statistical data.
Such databases may be used to analyze and evaluate welfare programs, and to obtain new insights about long term outcomes of social sector spending.
I am confident that all of you shall continue to build on these successes and provide India with robust and state-of-the-art public financial management systems.
I wish the Service and all officers and staff a bright future.
Jai Hind!
I am thankful to the state government for inviting me here and take this opportunity to convey my good wishes for the progress and prosperity of the people of Kerala.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Today, it proudly stands at the forefront in social development particularly in the fields of education, health and women empowerment.
The people of Kerala enjoy a quality of life that compares favourably with many developed countries in the world.
This remarkable advancement has been possible due to the combined efforts of the government, various social organizations and, most importantly, because of the hard work, the spirit of openness and enterprise of the people of Kerala.
It has the highest literacy rate in the country.
Kerala is also a pioneer in e-literacy having launched two breakthrough projects as early as 2002.
The Akshaya Project was launched with the objective of making at least one person in every family e-literate.
The IT@school project aimed at providing basic computer knowledge to every high school student.
This was further strengthened with a second centre in 2011.
It is heartening to note that Kerala has now over six hundred e-governance applications covering almost all departments, delivering e-services to its citizens.
They are also being made available on the mobile platform now.
All districts of the state have been covered under the e-District project.
About thirty thousand digital certificates are delivered digitally to the citizens daily by the Revenue Department alone.
The dynamic technology landscape due to the growth of internet and smart-phone penetration, combined with the proactive measures of the Government has rapidly transformed Kerala into a knowledge-powered economy.
The state has a mobile tele-density of 95 percent and an internet access covering over sixty percent of the population.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Started as a pilot project in Thiruvananthapuram district and implemented with the help of Student Police Cadets, this initiative aims at the digital empowerment of citizens from all walks of life.
It will enable ordinary citizens to effectively use the internet to avail government and private services in a secure manner.
Once extended to the entire state, the campaign will cover about three million citizens in the age group of thirty to sixty years.
With this path-breaking initiative, Kerala is on track towards becoming a fully digital society by 2020.
This IT Park also has the distinction of being the first in its class to be developed in the country by a labour cooperative society, the Uralungal Labour Contract Co-operative Society (ULCCS).
This society, formed in 1925 by the eminent social reformer Guru Vagbhadananda, has played a vital role in the socio-economic development of the region.
It has helped in improving the living standards of the economically-weaker sections by providing them job opportunities.
I am told that the first phase which covers an area of 0.5 million square feet will provide a base to five thousand professionals, besides creating indirect employment for over twenty thousand people in the region.
I am confident that this Park will go a long way in positioning Kerala along with the other leading Indian states in the IT sector.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
There have been several programmes aimed at encouraging women to take part in developmental and decision-making processes.
Kerala is a pioneer in gender equity measures and is a leading state in several women-centric parameters.
Yet, it was felt that a more gender-focussed approach is necessary, where all genders have equal access to development opportunities, resources and benefits, and possess equal voice in key decision-making areas.
This unique Park will act as a convergence centre for gender-related education, entrepreneurship training and capacity development activities.
It will provide a strong impetus to gender-inclusive growth.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In spite of Kerala having a robust social safety net, a large segment of the population find it difficult to cope with the problems of destitution, chronic or life threatening diseases, disabilities and sudden poverty.
The Government is committed to ensure that no one in the state languishes for want of food, medical treatment or care.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Kerala has achieved considerable success in strengthening local governments and decentralized development.
It has taken steps to ensure the participation of all sections of people in planning, decision-making, generating resources and ensuring transparency and accountability.
Democracy is inherent in the thought and culture of Kerala.
Parliamentary democracy thrives in Kerala on the solid foundation of an educated and well-informed electorate that accepts a diversity of views.
Here, a multi-religious and multi-ethnic society has co-existed in harmony for centuries, fostering a culture of inclusiveness and tolerance.
Kerala truly symbolizes the concept of Unity in Diversity, the very idea that defines India.
I wish all these projects inaugurated today, a great success and I am confident they will contribute significantly to improving the quality of life of the people and their welfare.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
This town and its surroundings have been a thriving centre of Islam, Christianity, Judaism as well as Hinduism.
It is heartening to know that the ancient Kurumba Bhagavati temple and the Cheraman Mosque, believed to be the oldest mosque in India, are both in Kodungalloor.
The two synagogues in Paravur and Chennamangalam, the historical precinct of Kottayil Kovilakam and the Kottapppuram fort with its links to the Portugese, the Dutch and the Mysore Sultans are also in the neighbourhood.
Kodungaloor is also believed to be the place where the Apostle of Jesus Christ, St. Thomas, landed bringing with him Christianity to India much before it reached Europe.
The project also envisages the conservation of archaeological monuments within 125 square kilometres spread across Thrissur and Ernakulam districts.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Muziris, after which this project is named, at the height of its glory, was an active port, trading everything from precious stones to spices.
Muziris was the doorway for cultures, religions and races into India.
It was frequented by large ships of ocean traders from across the world, including Arabs, Egyptians, Greeks, Romans and Chinese.
It is described as one of the four active ports which exported pepper and other goods.
But, the Malabar Coast remained a prime destination for foreign traders and visitors from different parts of the world.
Travellers such as Ibn Batuta and Marco Polo visited and wrote accounts about the busy ports of Malabar.
The Arabs continued their flourishing trade in spices and the Chinese were frequent visitors.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The Kings gifted land to set up places of worship and offered protection and patronage to believers of different religions.
Today, Kerala is a state where religions share traditions.
Many churches light oil lamps and raise flags as is done in Hindu temples.
Similarly, the Cheraman Mosque has an oil lamp which is always lit.
This region is home to an exceptionally rich and diverse history.
It is important that this complex narrative be disseminated and interpreted to the world and to India in a sensitive and professional way.
I am happy that the Muziris Heritage Project proposes to do so through a series of museums and interpretation centres, taking visitors through events and experiences across millennia.
I believe the project also seeks to provide visitors with a glimpse into the life of the common people of this area using the network of waterways that connect the historic sites with one another.
I have no doubt this project will open up to Indian and foreign tourists a new destination, bringing economic benefits to the people of the region as well as knowledge and enjoyment for the visitors.
Friends:
The spice trade and ancient ports in the state have created many islands of heritage and history within Kerala, but the tourist experiences have always been discrete.
This is where Muziris heritage project offers the best of heritage tourism to global travellers.
Local ownership can help bring grassroots knowledge and ideas for the implementation of the Project.
It will entrust the people of the area with the responsibility of ensuring that the Indian tradition ofAthithi Devo Bhavais made a reality.
Participation of people in planning and implementation of the project will further ensure full utilization of the economic and employment prospects that growth in tourism will bring to the region.Athithi Devo Bhava
This phase is to be implemented with the support of UNESCO and United Nations World Tourism Organization.
TheSpice Route Initiative is both important and timely with India seeking to once again emerge as a major centre for international trade and transport as well as a maritime power.
I understand theSpice Route Initiative will link 41 countries in Asia and Europe with India and rejuvenate our culturaland academic exchangeswith these nations.
The Muziris Heritage Project celebrates this magnificent heritage of our land where people of different religions, castes and languages live in harmony.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is achieved through the instrumentality of criminal law.
The mandate of criminal law is to punish criminals and prevent recurrence of crime.
Criminal Law has to be necessarily sensitive to changesin social structure and social philosophy.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
On the other hand, offences affecting a particular individual are as a rulecompoundable, unless they by their heinousness so affectthe community as to be declared non-compoundable.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Under this noble document, citizens of the country were entitled to certain guaranteed rights.
For instance, assault on person and public are defined in the IPC along with graded punishments for them.
Different courts and procedures have been decreed for different offences.
Nevertheless, it requires a thorough revision to meet the changing needs of the twenty-first century.
The IPC has undergone very few changes in the last one hundred fifty-five years.
Yet, there are many new offences which have to be properly defined and incorporated in the Code.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Crime of a fiduciary nature is also a crime against the State and its people.
Some economic offenses can be as serious as the other crimes which have been so meticulously defined and carefully catalogued in the IPC.
It is a challenge to bring all new-age offenses with its intricacies within the ambit of the criminal law.
It has resulted in greater conveniences but at the same time has led to occurrence of newer types of offenses.
Crimes in the cyber space like email spoofing, financial fraud, online gambling, match-fixing, cyber defamation and cyber stalking call for an ingenuous and proactive response from the law providers.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It has to be upheld at all times.
It is incumbent on the law enforcing agencies, particularly the police force, to fulfill its foremost duty of maintaining law and order sincerely and with dedication.
The police in our country must go beyond its role of being a law enforcing body.
It has to also be a proactive partner in growth and development.
The founding fathers of our Constitution had conceived inclusiveness, tolerance, self-restraint, honesty, discipline, respect and protection of women, senior citizens and weaker sections as essential ingredients of our democracy.
Our police force must incorporate these features in its functioning.
Our police officers must ensure quick redressal of the grievances of the common man.
They must partner other stake holders in creating a peaceful and secure atmosphere conducive to progress and prosperity.
They play a key role in instilling and strengthening public confidence in the criminal justice system.
Prosecutors are obligated to ensure that the accused receive a fair trial while looking after the interests of the victims.
It is therefore essential to equip public prosecutors with tools and knowledge to enable them to effectively respond to various forms ofcrimes.
I call upon the public prosecutors to play a more strategic and pro-active role in formulating crime control policies.
Your efforts must be directed at ensuring the prevalence of a fair, transparent and efficient criminal justice system in the country.
I once again applaud the Directorate of Prosecution, Kerala, for their endeavour to celebrate the 155thanniversary of the IPC.
I hope the conduct of such an event would spur serious debate and discussion on criminal law reform.
I wish you all the very best for the future.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
This college is a pioneer of modern education in Kerala.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
He, thereafter, appealed to the British government in Madras to initiate the process for starting a college in Kottayam.
Friends:
The College produced students who questioned the continued presence of the British in India.
Slogans demanding independence for India reverberated through the campus during our struggle for freedom.
Over the years, it has attracted distinguished faculty, with unswerving commitment to their profession.
Its students have at the same time distinguished themselves in various fields, achieving distinction in academics as well as cultural and sports activities.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The demands of higher education in our country can be met only if private sector participates equally with the public sector institutions.
The private sector has played a key role in higher education in many countries.
Top international universities including Harvard, Yale and Stanford are the result of private sector efforts.
Two other Indian institutions have been ranked within the top 20 small universities in the world by another international agency.
Honourable Members,
Today, I am proud to say that it is the world's most successful financial inclusion programme.
The programme has gone beyond mere opening of bank accounts, to becoming a platform for poverty eradication, by offering basic financial services and security to the poor.Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojna
The Mission intends to cover all 4041 statutory towns in coming 5 years.
A total of over four lakh twenty five thousand houses have been sanctioned with a project cost of over rupees twenty four thousand six hundred crore.
Direct Benefit Transfer has so far been extended to 42 schemes funded by my Government.
PAHAL has become the largest direct cash transfer program of its kind in the world, with nearly 15 crore beneficiaries.
Since June 2014, the food security coverage has more than doubled to cover over 68 crore persons.
More than 62 lakh LPG consumers have voluntarily surrendered their LPG subsidy under the campaign.
The highest number of new cooking gas connections to the rural poor were distributed in 2015.
Social justice with inclusion is the first promise of our Constitution and the poor and the backward are the focus of my Government.
Honourable Members,
This will immensely benefit our farmers in getting fair and remunerative prices.
The policy will lead to additional production of 17 Lakh metric tonnes annually in the next three years.
The highest ever urea fertilizer production was achieved in 2015.
India continues to be the biggest milk producing country with an impressive growth rate of 6.3%.
My Government has taken steps for strengthening agricultural higher education, setting up 109 new KVKs and three new Agricultural Technology Application Research Institutes.
The Food Processing Fund has been operationalized last year to provide affordable credit to designated Food Parks.
In the last 19 months, five new Mega Food Parks have been operationalized.
Under the Cold Chain Scheme, 33 projects have been made operational during the last 18 months.
Honourable Members,
We are driving job creation through an integrated set of initiatives including Make in India, Start up India, Mudra, Skill India, etc.Yuvaon ko Rojgaar
Notably, the Make in India initiative has achieved a 39% increase in FDI inflow despite an adverse global investment climate.
State Governments are being encouraged and supported to simplify procedures, introduce e-enabled processes and invest in infrastructure to improve investment climate.
Procedures have been simplified to enhance ease of approvals/clearances.
Dedicated Commercial Courts and Commercial Division in High Courts have been established.
For speedy resolution of commercial disputes, the long overdue amendments to the Arbitration Act have been made.
Udyog Aadhar Portal has been set up to facilitate online registration of MSMEs.
My Government has decided to set up rural livelihood and technology business incubators to boost entrepreneurship in the agriculture and rural sector.
Honourable Members,
Two Indian Institutes of Technology, six Indian Institutes of Management, one Indian Institute of Science Education and Research and one National Institute of Technology have started functioning.
My government has given impetus to research through the launch of IMPRINT India whereby scientific goalposts have been identified in 10 fields of research ranging from Defence to Sustainable Living.
The National Scholarship Portal provides a one-stop platform for applications of all scholarships.
My Government successfully hosted the 12th South Asian Games from 5-16 February, 2016 at Guwahati and Shillong, in which more than 3500 sports persons from all the SAARC countries participated.
The games were the biggest ever sporting event in North East India.Swasth
Infrastructure required for effective implementation of the Integrated Child Development Scheme is being strengthened in convergence with other programmes.
Focusing on generating wealth from waste, my Government has formulated policies on mandatory procurement of power from waste to energy plants, co-marketing of compost by chemicals and fertilizer companies, and use of construction and demolition waste.Swachh Bharat
At the crucial Climate Summit in Paris, India's position for climate justice, sustainable lifestyles and clean development was widely supported.
Real time online monitoring of 1487 industries and industrial units in seventeen highly polluting categories and of Ganga Water Quality has started.
Honourable Members
Significant steps have been taken to reform institutions, simplify procedures and repeal obsolete laws.
Close to 1800 obsolete legislations are at various stages of repeal.
NITI Aayog is actively engaging with States in policy formulation in the true spirit of cooperative federalism.
People's participation in policy making through initiatives like MyGov has now taken firm roots.
My Government has taken up an initiative for providing 500 e-governance services through Public Private-Partnership in 12 states of the country.
Stringent amendments to the Prevention of Corruption Act are also on the anvil to address the perceived gaps in anti-corruption law.
Honourable Members
My Government has initiated the Smart Cities programme, envisaging city development in achallenge mode.
In the first phase of the Smart City program, twenty cities havebeen selected after intense competition among ninety eight cities.
Installed solar capacity has almost doubled in the last 20 months and crossed 5000 MW.
Today under my Government, solar power is affordable and accessible to thousands of people.
My Government is committed to providing electricity to all the census villages by May 2018.
Eighty-three per cent of the capacity addition target of 88,537 MW for 12thPlan period has already been achieved.
To revive gas based power generation capacity, my Government implemented a new initiative of supply of Refined LNG.
This has ensured revival of stranded gas plants with installed capacity of 11,717 MW.
Two ambitious National LED Programmes have been launched for cities for Street Lighting and LED bulbs for Domestic Lighting.
Over 6 crore LED bulbs have already been distributed.
Strong emphasis on increasing coal production has resulted in a record 9.8% growth in CIL's coal production and highest ever output of coal.
This has also led to reduced imports of coal.
Honourable Members,
For systematic exploration in potential mineral bearing areas using state-of-the-art techniques, National Mineral Exploration Trust has been established.
Pradhan Mantri Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Yojana will implement developmental and welfare projects in mining affected areas for minimizing adverse impacts and ensuring sustainable livelihoods for the affected people.
The project is expected to generate employment for about one lakh persons, both direct and indirect.
Honourable Members,
All new coaches are now being fitted with bio-toilets.
Commissioning of Broad Gauge and electrification have been at all-time record levels.
Honourable Members,
To ensure connectivity to Chardham during all seasons, a project of over rupees twelve thousand crore has been taken up.
A special Green Highways Policy 2015 has been launched for making highways green and a pilot policy for conversion of diesel buses into electrical buses has been taken up.
The country recorded the highest ever production of motor vehicles in 2015.
Guidelines have been issued for protection of Good Samaritans from harassment in road accident cases.
Honourable Members,
Several steps for improving the operational efficiency of major ports and for simplifying rules and processes have been initiated.
In 2015, India achieved the fastest average turnaround time in ports and the highest ever quantity of cargo handled by major ports.
Domestic Air Passenger traffic has registered a substantial growth during the year.
Honourable Members,
Twenty nine Electronic Manufacturing Clusters are under development.
The recent interventions and subsequent rationalization of duty structure in mobile handset manufacturing industry has led to near doubling of mobile handset production in the current year.
Transparent and efficient auction of spectrum has fetched highest ever price of about Rupees one lakh ten thousand crore.
Under BharatNet, the architecture and design of the National Optical Fiber Network is being revamped to rapidly take broadband connectivity to our villages.
By spreading the network of Common Service Centers and setting up BPOs in small towns and linking land record modernization with the use of space technology, my Government is taking the benefits of Digital India to common citizens.
The proposed Postal Payment Bank of India will further boost financial inclusion.
Honourable Members,
Focus will be on completing the constellation of the Indian navigational satellites in 2016 to cater to indigenous navigation and location-based services.
Honourable members,
In addition, we have undertaken major governance reforms, brought in private sector talent and moved to a fully transparent and meritocratic recruiting process.
We have also issued 23 banking licenses after a long hiatus of ten years.
With the enactment of the Black Money (Undisclosed Foreign Income and Assets) and Imposition of Tax Act, 2015, a stringent legislative framework has been put in place to combat the menace.
A gamut of taxpayer facilities, viz., e-filing of returns and various forms, electronic processing and retrieval of documents and online grievance redressal are now available to the citizen.
Honourable Members,
Terrorism is a global threat and strong counter-terrorism measures are necessary worldwide to eradicate it completely.
Let me congratulate the security forces in successfully foiling the recent attack at the Pathankot air base by terrorists.
Firm and effective steps will be taken to deal with any situation arising out of cross-border terrorism.
The unprecedented floods that submerged Chennai in December last year brought untold human suffering and economic loss.
An amount of more than Rupees thirteen thousand crore has been released under State and National Disaster Response Fund.
Honourable Members,
This Shakti defines our strength.
My Government has approved the induction of women as Short Service Commission officers and as fighter pilots in the IAF.
In the future, my Government will induct women in all the fighter streams of our Armed Forces.
Acknowledgement must not hinge on ceremony or noble gestures of gratitude alone.
In spite of huge financial implication of more than Rupees seven thousand crore per annum, my Government has fulfilled its commitment to implement four decades old demand of One Rank One Pension.
Honourable Members,
States have been made partners in our diplomatic efforts.
The signing of the Motor Vehicles Agreement between Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Nepal, will provide seamless connectivity and further strengthen ties.
We have been a friend in need to Nepal during the devastating earthquake of April 2015.
My Government is committed to forging a mutually respectful relationship with Pakistan and in creating an environment of co-operation in combating cross border terrorism.
My Government believes in a secure and prosperous future for our neighbourhood.
We remain at the forefront of the global fight against terrorism.
Sustained Indian efforts have led to concrete action for reforming the UN Security Council.
Honourable Members,
Jai Hind
I would like to begin by congratulating the winners of the Infosys Prizes.
Their research is laying the groundwork for an evolved, enabling, and sustainable world.
The Infosys Prize today is considered by distinguished members of the academia as a major honour and recognition.
Awards like the Infosys Prize are an important step towards recognizing path-breaking research being pursued by scientists and academicians across the world.
Their work ranges from unravelling the intricacies of analytical Indian philosophy to enhancing our understanding of the universe and its components and to the biology of the malaria parasite.
Complex subjects such as the physics behind high intensity laser matter interactions, geometric group theory, and material physics have seen insightful contributions from the laureates.
The inspiring journey of these winners will go a long way in motivating the next generation of scientists, researchers, and thought leaders.
Science, technology, and innovation are the major drivers of national development.
The second industrial revolution saw striking improvements in manufacturing and production technology that in turn led to a widespread adoption of systems such as railroad networks and the telegraph.
The enormous expansion of rail and telegraph lines in time allowed unprecedented movement of people and ideas, which culminated in a new wave of globalization.
Innovations in the communications and digital technologies in the last decade have brought the world much closer together.
The Internet has impacted every facet of our lives and we are able to access new ideas, information and a whole new world of communities.
The World Wide Web continues to influence how we interact, conduct business, learn, and perceive the world around us.
Suffice to say, advancements in science have transformed the way we live and relate with each other.
The proliferation of digital technologies, coupled with advancements in energy and genomics, is substantially raising the productivity of business as well as agriculture.
Digital technology is also redefining how services such as healthcare and education are delivered, contributing to higher living standards for millions of Indians.
India has over 210 million households with more than 140 million households in the rural areas.
People residing in rural hinterlands do not have easy access to the banking services and related facilities.
Mobile banking is increasingly seen as a tool that holds the power to bridge the gap between banked and unbanked individuals.
The creation of new educational and research institutions began from 1950 itself.
As early as 1951, the country decided to set up an Atomic Energy Commission which has enabled India build her own reactors.
The space programme was also soon started enabling us launch rockets and satellites into space.
In 2013, a Science, Technology and Innovation Policy was initiated by the Government aiming to shape the future of an aspiring India.
Today, we are determined and committed to continued investment in basic science even as we use science to transform our society.
It is the synergy between science and public policy which resulted in technologically upgrading our agriculture system.
The excellence of our scientists and toil of our farmers, together led to the Green Revolution of the sixties.
More recently, we have made major strides in the Biotechnology and Information Technology industries.
Recently we made history, when the Indian Mars Orbiter Mission successfully entered the Martian orbit.
We were part of global collaborations in life sciences which resulted in a low-cost vaccine against Rotavirus, which will soon be introduced in our national immunization programme.
Under the new UK-India Skills pledge, 11 UK-based companies have committed to support skills development in India.
I am happy to point out that there has been a consistent emphasis on stimulating the scientific temperament of the Indian youth by providing the best facilities to gain knowledge and test their skills.
Presently, the country has a total of 16 Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs), 30 National Institutes of Technology (NITs), 162 universities awarding about 4,000 doctorate and 35,000 post-graduate degrees, some 20 research institutes supported by the Department of Science and Technology and more than 40 research laboratories run by the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR).
The youth of our country need our consistent encouragement to pursue innovation in their chosen fields.
I am certain that the exceptional journey of the Infosys Prize Laureates will inspire youth to take up research and participate in national progress.
Gandhiji believed that if science becomes all technique and technology, it quickly deteriorates into man against humanity.
Technologies emerge from the paradigms of science.
And if there is an insufficient understanding of the greater human purposes that the technology is striving to serve, we will become victims of our own technocracy.
Innovation is integral to economic development of a nation, and society at large.
I am confident that initiatives like the Infosys Prizes will go a long way towards nurturing the innovation ecosystem in our country and inspire young minds to solve real-world problems.
Thank you.
It provides an enabling platform to social entrepreneurs to think and act as change agents.
It is a matter of pride that this organization has over the last 35 years of its establishment, mentored and supported over three thousand Ashoka Fellows in eighty two countries, including over 380 Fellows elected from India.
The candidates and their innovations have to fulfill criteria like system-changing idea, entrepreneurial quality, creativity, ethical fiber and social impact.
It is heartening to know that the Ashoka Fellows for the year 2015 who are present here have devised innovative solutions in areas like education and skills training, healthcare and urban development.
Friends:
At the same time, there is tremendous ingenuity amongst the people, which if tapped, could address the necessities of the common men and women.
Much as the blooming of the spring, innovations by students, professionals, common man and local communities can bring smiles on the faces of millions of people.
Friends:
It encourages the engagement of talent with the society to improve the quality of life.
Countries successful in building such a network have become innovation leaders.
As an attempt to bring educational institutions and innovators within the ambit of an inclusive innovation system, a programme for Innovation Scholars In-Residence was started in Rashtrapati Bhavan.
I would like to inform you that two batches of innovation-scholars have come so far, one group of five scholars in the year 2014 and a second group of ten scholars in 2015.
During their stay at the Rashtrapati Bhavan, they have been mentored and connected with relevant stakeholders to provide wings to their ideas.
Friends:
The large network of higher educational institutions of 712 universities and over 36,000 colleges in India is poised to play a leading part in developing an innovation eco-system.
To catalyze the institutions of higher learning in this process, I have been urging the leaders of the higher education sector to establish a connection between their institutes and innovations in their hinterland, and to also set up Innovation Clubs.
I am happy to state that in over sixty central higher educational institutions, innovation clubs have been set up.
It demonstrated new technologies and products made by the grassroots innovators.
The Global Roundtables on Inclusive Innovation and Financing of Innovation in the Festival saw the participation of distinguished thinkers, policy-makers, academicians, entrepreneurs and financiers.
You may like to consider participating in this event.
The presence of renowned participants from India and abroad will provide a global platform to all the innovators and participants of this Festival.
I wish you all the very best for your endeavours.
Chase your dreams as you fulfill the dreams of your country and countrymen.
Thank you.
It is indeed a privilege for me to have the splendid sight of majestic warships anchored in these waters of Bay of Bengal.
The fluttering pennants and flags on the dressing lines, happy and proud men in white manning their ships is indeed heartwarming.
I am privileged to be here today with all of you and review this imposing international parade of ships.
50 friendly navies have sailed across oceans and sent naval ships and/or delegations to participate in the first International Fleet Review on the East Coast of India at Visakhapatnam.
On behalf of the Government, and the people of India, I extend a very warm welcome to all our foreign guests and thank you for honouring the invitation of our Indian Navy.
The navies world over have conducted Fleet Reviews to symbolise their loyalty, allegiance to the nation, and strengthen bonds between the sailors and the state.
IFR 2016, while showcasing the prowess of the Indian Navy, has brought together navies from across the globe here on Indian shores, signifying our common desire to use the seas to promote peace, cooperation and friendship, as also to develop partnerships for a secure maritime future.
The navies of the world have a unique role in promoting goodwill, nurturing peace and tranquility of the oceans.
Your ships and all personnel participating at this momentous fleet review are ambassadors of great nations that you represent.
The message of friendship and goodwill of your people strengthens our belief in promoting peace, prosperity and stability for mutual co-existence and ensuring secure seas.
The Indian Navy, accordingly, has re-aligned its maritime strategy, to reflect the changes in the evolving global environment, and has established a credible record of cooperative initiatives to promote stability of the oceans, and played a central role in ensuring safety of the vital sea lines of communication, across the Indian Ocean.
An event of such magnitude could be organised only by the involvement and support of the people.
May I thank and congratulate the Government of Andhra Pradesh and all citizens of Visakhapatnam for their cooperation.
I thank all naval ships and delegations assembled here for the Fleet Review to mark this historic occasion.
I am confident that our guests from far and wide, will carry with them pleasant memories of the warmth and traditional hospitality shown by the people of India.
I would urge that as you sail back to your homelands, carry with you our message of global peace and brotherhood, so that we can strengthen our bonds of friendship and secure a better maritime environment for future generations.
Thank You
Jai Hind!
I congratulate the students who are being awarded degrees today.
On this occasion, I also take the opportunity to compliment the members of the faculty for shaping the minds and skills of these students.
Over eight thousand students of IARI have been awarded post-graduate or PhD degrees so far.
Several alumni of IARI have held key positions driving agricultural research and education in important institutions in India and abroad.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Pusa basmati varieties accounted for more than 90 percent of the 30,000 crore rupees of export earnings this year.
It gave profit in excess of two lakh rupees per hectare to the farmers.
Likewise, IARI wheat varieties have resulted in an additional production of 3 million tonnes of wheat in the previous year.
They have resulted in enhanced input use efficiency, farm profit and environmental sustainability.
Friends:
Crops use 23 percent of the applied fertilizer with the balance 77 percent lost to environment.
To further increase the efficiency of fertilizer use, easy methods based on plant tissue analysis for sensing nutrient status and making fertilizer recommendations are needed.
We need technology solutions for smart water usage.
It is heartening to note that several water-wise technologies like precision irrigation, Pusa Hydrogel, zero tillage wheat system, direct seeded rice system, and short duration crop varieties have been developed by IARI.
Scientists here must continue with their efforts to develop water-efficient and drought-tolerant varieties.
Friends:
The demand for these food commodities is expected to increase in future substantially.
IARI has developed mustard varieties suitable for unconventional areas that can boost oil seed production.
A large number also suffer from Vitamin-A deficiency.
To address malnutrition in children, food grains must be bio-fortified with quality protein and micronutrients.
These technologies should reach the farmers immediately for alleviating malnourishment in women and children.Friends:
After a record food grains production of 265 million tonne in 2013-14, a year of normal monsoon, the production level came down to 253 million tonne in 2014-15, when a 12 percent rainfall deficit was registered.
Nature has not been kind to us this year as well.
A deficient monsoon followed by a further dry spell is likely to affect agricultural production for the second year in a row.
This is an area of grave concern.
Global climate change could aggravate these problems.
Institutes like IARI must leverage opportunities from frontier sciences such as bio-technology, synthetic biology, nano-technology, computational biology, sensor technology and geo-spatial technology to develop climate-resilient technology solutions.
Innovation in agricultural techniques and practices must be supported through infusion of funds, mentoring of ideas, and technical assistance.
The risk-taking ability of farmers must be boosted.
The newly-launched crop insurance scheme will leverage technology to provide risk cover to the farmers.
Friends:
Our farmers and agri-preneurs must make full use of this opportunity.
Increase in investment for agriculture technology development, rural agri-infrastructure, on-farm processing and value addition, and storage facilities are needed.
Agriculturists must be trained to transform their farms into production-cum-processing centres.
Research in our institutes must address the critical issues that hinder the development of rural agri-businesses.
Friends:
For that, we need to create a large pool of competent faculty empowered with state-of-the-art research infrastructure.
A strong network of teachers, learners and practitioners will facilitate lab-to-field dissemination of good agricultural practices.
The barometer of performance is the quality of their products.
Able, committed and industrious professionals from these institutions are required to spearhead the next farm revolution.
Students and alumni of this reputed institution must seize the opportunity and contribute to the transformation in agriculture.
I wish the graduating students the very best in life and career.
It is the foundation of civilization and a necessity for economic success.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
That optimism has faded in the first fifteen years of this century.
There is unprecedented turbulence across vast regions, with alarming increase in regional instabilities.
The scourge of terrorism has reshaped war into its most barbaric manifestation.
This includes addressing issues of ideology and dealing with countries that sponsor or support terrorism.
It is imperative that the world in one voice rejects all manifestations of terrorism, without distinction, and proscribes States that support or sponsor terrorism as an instrument of State policy.
Fragmentation of civil society, rather than its consolidation, is not a wise strategy.
The former course leads to radicalization, which thereafter leads to competitive violence.
Think tanks and civil society organizations have a larger role to play in this process of social integration.
A pluralistic and inclusive society like India has long presented a model for multi-cultural living.
It is for this reason that global terror outfits have not been able to find traction in India.
We have, as a nation, to strengthen that plurality so that it acts as a bulwark against radical ideologies and thought processes.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Our counter-terrorism effort has to be more pointed, more focused, more objective and more professional.
With these few words, I conclude.
I wish you and the deliberations of the Conference all success.
Jai Hind.
Your Excellency President Francois Hollande,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
President Hollande, I am delighted to welcome you and the esteemed members of your delegation to India on this very special occasion, which is historic in many ways.
When your distinguished French Infantry troops march in step with Indian troops in the parade tomorrow, they will make history yet again by being the first-ever foreign contingent to do so.
Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen,
The friendship between India and France is driven by a remarkable similarity in the ideals and aspirations of our people.
The deep bonds of our time-tested friendship are only set to strengthen in the years ahead, anchored as they are in this rich, unshakeable foundation.
France is also a key partner in our quest for harnessing nuclear energy to provide reliable and affordable energy for all.
While our cooperation in science and research, education, culture and health is growing, I am glad that the Government of France and the captains of French industry are actively partnering India in our ambitious developmental initiatives, infrastructure, smart cities, clean energy, railways and skill development.
Excellency, I am glad that you started your visit to India in Chandigarh, a city that is a monument to the genius of Le Corbusier.
As we did then, so must our two countries fight resolutely now for freedom from the forces of intolerance, extremism and terrorism.
The dastardly terror attacks in Paris and Pathankot have underlined the urgency for countries like ours to combat this existential threat to humanity and human civilisation.
We also need to combat the shared challenge of climate change.
Excellency, we laud your leadership and commitment in forging the Paris Agreement on climate change which paves the way for our collective endeavour to safeguard our planet for future generations.
We must now ensure that the world walks the path of sustainable development through sustainable lifestyles.
Excellency, we have begun the New Year with fresh hopes and dreams and a resolve to jointly overcome the challenges facing us.
We live in difficult times characterized by violence, fundamentalism and inequality.
But we also live in times of brilliant innovation, of great creativity, of unparalleled global interaction.
I am confident that your visit heralds new beginnings in scaling new heights in our bilateral relationship and in our common quest for peace, stability and prosperity for all.
With these words, ladies and gentleman, may I raise a toast to the friendship that has always existed between the peoples of India and France and to ever closer cooperation between our two countries.
My Fellow Citizens:
I convey my special greetings to members of our Armed Forces, Para-military Forces and Internal Security Forces.
Fellow Citizens:
On this day, we gave ourselves the Constitution of India.
The enduring democratic institutions they establishedhave given us the gift of continuity on the path of progress.
India today is a rising power, a country fast emerging as a global leader in science, technology, innovation and start-ups, and whose economic success is the envy of the world.
Fellow Citizens:
During this year, the global economy remained subdued.
Unpredictability ruled the commodity markets.
Uncertainty marked the institutional responses.
In such troubled environment, no one nation could be an oasis of growth.
Weak investor sentiments led to withdrawal of funds from emerging markets including India putting pressure on the Indian rupee.
Our exports suffered.
Our manufacturing sector is yet to recover fully.
While large parts of India were affected by severe drought, other areas reeled under devastating floods.
Unusual weather conditions impacted our agricultural production.
Rural employment and income levels suffered.
Fellow Citizens:
There is a great virtue in acknowledging a problem and resolving to address it.
India is building and implementing strategies to solve these problems.
This year, with an estimated growth rate of 7.3 percent, India is poised to become the fastest growing large economy.
Contraction in global oil prices has helped maintain external sector stability and control domestic prices.
Despite occasional setbacks, industrial performance this year has been strong.
AadhaarPradhan Mantri Jan Dhan YojanaSaansad Adarsh Gram YojanaDigital IndiaPradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana
This too is a virtue of democracy.
But let us also applaud what our democracy has achieved.
With investments in infrastructure, manufacturing, health, education, science and technology, we are positioning ourselves well for achieving a higher growth rate which will in the next ten to fifteen years help us eliminate poverty.
Fellow Citizens:
When grim instances of violence hit at these established values which are at the core of our nationhood, it is time to take note.
We must guard ourselves against the forces of violence, intolerance and unreason.
Fellow Citizens:
Fellow Citizens:
Peace is the primary objective of a rational consciousness as well as our moral universe.
It is the foundation of civilization and a necessity for economic progress.
That optimism has faded in the first fifteen years of this century.
There is unprecedented turbulence across vast regions, with alarming increase in regional instabilities.
The scourge of terrorism has reshaped war into its most barbaric manifestation.
Terrorism is inspired by insane objectives, motivated by bottomless depths of hatred, instigated by puppeteers who have invested heavily in havoc through the mass murder of innocents.
This is war beyond any doctrine, a cancer which must be operated out with a firm scalpel.
There is no good or bad terrorism; it is pure evil.
Fellow Citizens:
Terrorists seek to undermine order by rejecting the very basis of strategic stability, which are recognized borders.
If outlaws are able to unravel borders, then we are heading towards an age of chaos.
Our example can be its own message to a world in anxious need of amity.
Fellow Citizens:
Each of us has the right to lead a healthy, happy and productive life in India.
This right has been breached, especially in our cities, where pollution has reached alarming levels.
Climate change has acquired real meaning with 2015 turning out to be the warmest year on record.
Multiple strategies and action at various levels is necessary.
Innovative solutions of urban planning, use of clean energy, and changing the mindsets of the people call for active participation of all stakeholders.
Permanence of such changes can be ensured only if people own these changes.
Fellow Citizens:
Fellow Citizens:
Move ahead, the roll of drums announce your triumphal march;
With feet of glory, you shall cut out your own path;
Delay not, delay not, a new age dawns
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
Today, Income Tax Appellate Tribunal completes 75 years of service to the nation through delivery of justice to the tax payers.
The established model of ITAT has been used to set up Tribunals in the areas of Indirect Taxes, Administration, Railways and Foreign Exchange.
The setting up of Tribunal for delivering justice in matters related to direct taxation, laid a foundation for impartial, easy and speedy justice.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
This indicates the rising importance of direct taxation in India since introduction.Rupees 30 lakhsRupees 7.98 lakh crores
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The quick resolution of disputes is one of the important ways to reduce grievances of the tax payers.
Speedy justice requires a high degree of legal, technical and technological expertise in the organization.
It also requires continuous updation of knowledge in the fast changing legal and economic eco-system.
I am happy to know that the ITAT has been recognized by the UNDP for its work and is assisting the tax judiciaries of developing countries like Ghana and Nigeria.
I would like to see ITAT playing a lead role in tax jurisdiction where Litigation Management System is in nascent stage.
With the development of Indian economy, the direct taxes and number of tax payers have increased substantially, which have put pressures on the tax dispute redressal system.
The Government has responded to these challenges by increasing the number of ITAT benches all over the country.
Today we have 63 benches, which operate from 27 stations.
The rising trends in tax disputes and the quantum involved in tax litigations, call for an innovative tax litigation management system.
Over the years, taxation department has responded to meet the challenges through capacity development.
The rising disputes in these areas call for trained manpower in both the tax department as well as in tax judiciary to keep India globally competitive in tax judiciary system.
(i) Tax Jurisprudence in Cross-border Transactions
I hope that members of the ITAT family and the Ministry of Law will respond to these challenges pro-actively.
You need to replicate such kinds of practices all over the country and become a true symbol of bringing tax justice at the doorsteps of the tax payers.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I hope that ITAT and members of ITAT family will continue to excel in their area of work and contribute to the growth and development of the country.
Once again, my best wishes to all of you on completion of 75 years and celebration of the platinum jubilee.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Vice Chancellors of Central Universities;
Directors of IITs, NITs, IISERs and other institutes of higher learning and civil service academies;
Faculty members;
My dear students:
Friends:
Friends:
Friends:
Information and communication technology has made us think, act and react differently.
Distances have shrunk; mobility has increased; instant communication has led to greater awareness, and raised expectations.
Consumerism is at its peak.
Our education system must gear up to develop our youth on these lines.
Friends:
We must inculcate in them the spirit of democratic behaviour which calls for an appreciation of the rich diversity of our nation, assimilation of ideas, and accommodation for divergent or contrarian views.
The idea of secularism is deeply ingrained in the consciousness of our nation.
It has to be further strengthened in the minds of the young ones to build a harmonious society.
Unless women participate on equal terms and in equal numbers in the process of nation-building, all efforts will remain incomplete.
The occurrence of some unfortunate incidents of atrocity and violence against women in recent years should strengthen our resolve to wipe out any trace of depravity and evil from the minds of individuals.
A spirit of reverence towards women must be instilled in our children in our homes and educational institutions.
It must guide social conduct of an individual from an early age.
Friends:
During the last few years, we have provided citizens the right to information, employment, education and food, backed by legal guarantees.
The Government has launched programmes for financial inclusion, creation of model villages and formation of a digitally-empowered society.
We have strong legislations and schemes oriented towards inclusion.
Friends:
My young friends:
Your commitment to national goals will determine the direction of our future growth.
As you get ready to embark on the journey to fulfill your dreams, let me share with you my own little checklist for nation-building.
We work towards nation-building if:
- We produce more than we consume;
- We give more than we take;
- We work more than we idle; and
- We think more than we talk.
You may just find this list useful.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
To begin with, let me compliment Shri Shiv Nadar, the founder chairman of HCL, for his vision in the field of higher learning.
His Foundation, set up two decades ago, has become an important platform for transformational education.
Shiv Nadar schools are emerging as an important chain of progressive schools in the National Capital Region.
It was started with the goal to become a comprehensive, multi-disciplinary and student-oriented institution focused on creating new knowledge and producing competent professionals.
The university has since adopted a distinct curriculum to nurture students for the exciting opportunities of tomorrow.
Its unique approach has the potential to positively influence the higher education landscape of our country in the next two to three decades.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The necessity of having quality manpower in sufficient numbers dawned upon our policymakers.
Creating a human resource pool became one of the critical focus areas in our socio-economic agenda.
As a consequence, the higher education sector has seen phenomenal expansion in post-independent India.
From 20 universities in 1950, we today have 712 universities.
During this period, the number of colleges has increased from 500 to over 36,000.
Some of the private institutions have ably complemented the efforts of the public sector institutions in meeting the high demand for tertiary education of our society.
Though proliferation has led to greater access, its negative fall-out on standards is alarming.
If the declining quality of education particularly in the area of higher learning is not reversed quickly, we will land ourselves in a scenario of having a large number of people with degrees but not enough manpower with proficiency.
Hence, access to learning opportunities and the pursuit of excellence must both receive equal attention.
I am happy to inform that in 2015 two Indian institutions for the first time have been ranked within the top two hundred universities in international rankings.
I am confident that many more will join in the coming years.
I have been repeatedly saying that in a manner similar to ancient times when India led in the field of higher education, today also, our institutions of higher learning must come up to international standards.
Friends:
Its large campus of 286 acres should contribute to arich scholastic environment.
Its residential character should help to nurture a strong culture of exploration, collaboration and dialogue.
Its schools should offer innovative courses in engineering, sciences, humanities, management and entrepreneurship.
My confidence in this university stems from the fact that the two thousand students enrolled in its various programmes are taught by quality teachers including faculty from renowned institutions abroad.
This cross fertilization of minds and intellect is very important.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
However, the demographic dividend could also turn into a liability if we cannot provide our youth job skills to improve their employability.
The importance of research in universities is paramount.
Research is central to developing effective academic systems.
Dear Students:
You have a great future ahead.
You will make your families and your alma mater proud.
By following the values of perseverance, commitment and hard work, you will raise the bar of performance and excel in your chosen field.alma mater
You fully understand the power of technology as a tool of change.
Blend your technology skills with your compassion to find solutions to the problems of the less fortunate brothers and sisters of your community.
By this way, you can build a better future for your country.
You can repay the trust that your countrymen have reposed in you by fulfilling your social obligations.
Friends:
Success is ultimately gauged by the transformations brought about by educated individuals.
Inclusive development, for one, is a barometer for a society that has leveraged the force of education well.
For that to happen though, greater engagement at the grassroots level is called for.
Many non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are doing commendable work in rural India in various sectors.
Much more can be done if this voluntary sector is strengthened.
The HCL Citizens Grant supports and facilitates the institutionalization of NGOs through the creation of strong governance framework and management capability.
The HCL Foundation has committed one hundred crore rupees over the next five years towards this grant.
As this grant is intended to bring in better governance into the social sector system, it will benefit all stakeholders in the long run.
I applaud the Shiv Nadar University for taking the lead in connecting the industry to the cause of social uplift.
The skill and knowledge which you have acquired will help you in moving ahead and solving problems one by one.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
You will have many professional accomplishments in your career.
However, I want to remind you that you must also use your knowledge and technical expertise for the welfare of the common man.
I am sure you will succeed on all fronts.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The seventeen departments of this institute offer programmes at all levels in traditional disciplines such as mechanical, civil, chemical and electrical engineering, computer science, pharmaceutical sciences, and architecture, and also in contemporary fields like bio-engineering, space engineering, and remote sensing.
Since its inception, BIT Mesra has shown exemplary commitment towards furthering the cause of higher education in the country and harnessing the potential of young men in the cause of national development.
Friends:
Friends:
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Entrepreneurial studies can be taught as a course in our institutions.
Thank you.
At the outset, please accept my good wishes for a very happy, healthy and peaceful New Year.
I pray that the year 2016 brings with it, renewed energy and enthusiasm to all of us and help us to perform our duties better for the progress and prosperity of our nation.
Even then, there were several positives.
Our economy, which grew at 7.2 percent in the first half of 2015-16, is on way to recovery.
Despite a dull trade performance, our external sector stability is intact.
Current account deficit is a manageable 1.4 percent of GDP in the first half of the current financial year.
Foreign exchange reserves are comfortable at over 350 billion US dollars.
A worrisome feature is the agriculture sector which has been impacted by a deficient monsoon.
Devastating floods occurred in different parts of the country, particularly Tamil Nadu and Assam, while several states reeled under severe drought conditions.
To overcome these testing times, the Union and the State Governments have to work together.
Distinguished Governors and Lt. Governors:
In our parliamentary democracy, the Governors are the constitutional heads of their respective states.
They must perform their duties and obligations within the framework of the Constitution.
In other words, they must play their assigned role while respecting the distinct authority and responsibility vested in each of the three organs of the state, that is, the executive, the judiciary and the legislature.
With their wisdom, experience and moral authority, they must help create a harmonious relationship between the Centre and the states.
This will be in the best interest of the state and its people.
There are several important initiatives that have been taken by the Government of India to accelerate the progress of the nation and for enhancing the standard of living of the people.
Prominent among them are Swachh Bharat Mission, Smart City Mission, Digital India, Make in India, Skilling India, and the Start-up India initiatives.
Each of these programmes have a specific role in the making of a new India where there would be greater opportunities for its citizens especially the youth.
Though these flagship policies and programmes are to be primarily implemented by the executive under the leadership of the Chief Ministers, your astute leadership, power of persuasion and balancing influence can help in this transformative process.
You are the Visitors or Chancellors of several universities in your states.
You can use this association to help create islands of academic excellence and motivate these institutions to become smart campuses.
Through technology demonstration, they can also become the nucleus for inclusive development in their regions.
You can impress upon these institutes to adopt at least five villages which they can help transform into model villages.
They can also work in the areas of financial inclusion and digital inclusion in the adopted villages.
Likewise, they can create robust models of cleanliness in these villages that can act as real examples for others.
You can convert Raj Bhavans into Smart Raj Bhavans.
You must make full use of this facility.
You can ensure the digitalization of Raj Bhavans to make them technology demonstrators.
You can open Raj Bhavans for public viewing just as we have done with the Rashtrapati Bhavan.
In the Rashtrapati Bhavan, we have made an attempt to create a Humane, Hi-Tech and Heritage township.
The integrated approach through a command and control system will optimize the use of resources and provide efficient delivery of services to the residents.
Let us all give our best to make 2016 the year of growth and transformation.
In conclusion, I thank you for this opportunity to reach out to you and share my thoughts.
I look forward to meeting you in the Conference of Governors next month where we would discuss the substantive issues.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I have had a long association with IEA and, therefore, when an opportunity presented to renew that association, in the form of an invitation from Dr. Kaushik Basu to inaugurate the present session, I readily accepted.
I fondly recall having inaugurated the 1998 session at Kolkata also.
It is heartening to see IEA fulfill that objective in a fruitful manner.
Thank you!
Jai Hind!
I am sure this Vedapathasala will emerge as a centre for promoting Vedic knowledge, oral traditions and our heritage.
I congratulate the Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams (TTD) for taking this initiative of opening a Vedapathasala for the benefit of the students pursuing Vedic education.
I am told that it is supporting over 1000 Vedic scholars by providing them with financial assistance.
It is also financially assisting 100 Vedapathasalas spread across the country.
It is running seven Vedapathasalas at Tirumala, Hyderabad, Nalgonda, Vizianagaram, Kotappakonda and Ai-Bhimavaram.
It has also started Sri Venkateswara Vedic University, a unique institution of its kind.
I am glad to know that it has entered into an MoU with RCI-DRDO for conducting scientific research in association with eminent scientists.
It has also established Centre for Veda Science Research (CVSR) for promoting research in Vedas under the enlightened care of scientific institutes.
It has also recognized 7 Pathasalas as Centres of Excellence in Vedic Studies to give fillip for oral tradition of Vedas.
It has taken initiative to record 10 rare Vedic sakhas for future generations.
I am sure this Vedapathasala will emerge as a reputed centre of learning and a seat of our traditional Vedic knowledge.
Thank you.
I am delighted to be here today on this historic occasion.
NIMHANS has cut across boundaries and disciplines by integrating care with prevention and rehabilitation.
It has taken the lead in integrating biological sciences with social and behavioural studies.
At the very outset, I would like to congratulate all the founding members and successive Directors of this institution for their vision and leadership.
They have developed this Institution into what it is today, and the nation appreciates their efforts and contribution.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is only appropriate that NIMHANS, located in the IT City of Bangalore, should adopt modern, computer-based Hospital Information Systems to improve efficiencies in all its Centres.
The use of information technology to invigorate health care delivery also helps in reducing costs, optimising resource management and minimising paper work.
I would stress that while formulating policy, our Government must always take care to ensure that due priority is given to human resource development in the field of mental healthcare and delivery.
We also need to systematically devise innovative methods for enhancing the delivery of mental health care services.
I am glad to see that the National Mental Health Policy of the Government of India seeks to speedily integrate mental health care services into general health care as part of non communicable disease.
It is also an important priority to address the stigma experienced by persons who are mentally ill.
They should not continue to be subjected to neglect and marginalisation.
The first-ever National Mental Health Survey that NIMHANS will undertake is a good step in this direction.
I understand the Survey will cover a representative population across many States and Union Territories of India and that Phase 1 of the study has commenced in 12 States.
It is also appropriate that the survey will not only include an assessment of mental health systems in each State but also the availability of adequate human resources for health services.
The outcome of this survey will, no doubt, be valuable input for enhancement of the standards and quality of health services in the country.
I am glad that the current ongoing research into Mental Health and Neuroscience is in a promising phase of discovery and development.
Findings in stem cell research, molecular genetics, and the availability of new methods of brain imaging, for example, have brought new hope for the treatment of brain disorders.
It is apt that NIMHANS has, through its research, been able to provide empirical evidence of the benefits of yoga in building equanimity of the mind.
I am confident that NIMHANS shall also contribute to the discovery of new drugs and new therapeutic modalities.
Indian mental health professionals have proven that community care of the mentally ill is a feasible and cost effective option.
This is a route that leads to significant recovery.
Several models have shown that integration of mental health with primary health care, training of health functionaries, easier availability of essential drugs and better management are increasing effectiveness within resource constraints in India.
I understand that about half the patients at NIMHANS pay only a nominal fee or avail the highly specialized services offered by NIMHANS free of cost.
These models - as well as the NIMHANS Community Mental Health and Rehabilitation Centre and Neuro-biology Research Centre (NRC) are successful models that can be replicated in other parts of the country.
Similarly, the MEG Research Centre is the first of its kind in India.
It is indeed a great pleasure for me to inaugurate this facility today.
I am also pleased to inaugurate the NIMHANS heritage museum.
I congratulate all those associated with its creation.
Designating NIMHANS as the Institute of National Importance is a tribute to its various patient care activities, innovations, research and new initiatives.
I have no doubt that NIMHANS will continue to inspire and support the development of the mental health sector at state, national and even international levels.
With these words, I once again congratulate NIMHANS and dedicate this Institute of National Importance to the nation.
Jai Hind.
Dear graduating students:
Friends:
A higher rank improves morale, enhances job prospects of students, and helps in attracting both quality faculty and meritorious students.
It is a matter of great satisfaction that for the first time, two Indian institutions have figured amongst the top 200 universities this year.
I hope other Indian institutions would follow suit.
Nascent universities like yours through a sustained effort at better academic management can soon be in the reckoning.
This truism applies to the education system as well.
World-class education is feasible only with world-class faculty.
Faculty development must occupy the top priority in our institutions.
The theoretical framework of any discipline undergoes rapid change as new concepts continuously emerge replacing older ones.
With the qualities of foresight and eagerness, our teachers can always stay abreast of the latest developments in their field.
In the context of teaching, we have to overcome the twin challenges of closing the vacancy gap expeditiously and also attracting meritorious people to this profession.
A flexible approach to mitigate shortage of teachers is needed.
Adjunct faculty from industry and research institutions can be hired.
They would provide an industry orientation in the higher education pedagogy.
Specialists from abroad could inject new ideas.
The Global Initiative for Academic Networks (GIAN) is a welcome step in this direction.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Friends:
Central universities are intended to be a vehicle for social transformation.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Students can also be deployed to undertake community-based projects.
They can identify problems and involve themselves in research to find solutions.
Measures like these would mould students into confident and purposeful human beings, who can through their conviction and own example inspire others.
Let me conclude in the words of Mahatma Gandhi:
We must become the change we want to see in the world
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
You live in an era where the pace of technology transition is so fast, that even as I speak, new concepts are being introduced, established paradigms are being re-defined and research is opening new vistas.
MCEME is a truly unique institution, one which empowers the human resource of the Corps of EME with the highest levels of skills in Technology Management, imbibes best practices of present day engineering and also undertakes applied research for development of military systems.
The canvas of training at MCEME is both wide and varied, ranging from basic training for Jawans to Bachelors of Technology and Masters of Technology Courses for the Officers.
Your knowledge and enthusiasm will lead you to creative ideas and innovations, which will impact and improve the existing methods and systems.
As young technocrats, you must remember that the Indian Army has been the torch bearer of many non-military innovations.
Military Technology has benefitted civil society immensely and its spin-offs have contributed significantly to nation building.
I was extremely happy to know that on Army Day this year, the Prime Minister gave awards for excellence to eight projects of Indian Army, of which four were from MCEME.
Today, as you graduate I urge you to set for yourself a befitting goal and having done so, utilise your technical competence, skills and hardwork to realise it.
May God be with you always!
JAI HIND!
Thank you,
Jai Hind.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
This is really a big global challenge for sustaining the habitation ecosystem.
The energy production contributes to 35% of the global green-house gas emission, followed by industrial production 18%, agriculture 14%, transport 14%, deforestation 10%, construction 10%, waste and water treatment 6%.
Energy consumption is one of the important parameters for measuring Development Index of society.
In spite of rapid development in India since independence, India continues to be the low per capita energy consuming country.
This is primarily because of the reason that the installed capacity and availability of power is not keeping pace with the energy demand of the society and secondly, our energy eco-system is considered to be inefficient because of losses in transmission and distribution system and also because of use of low efficiency equipment in the country.
Therefore, we as a country, have a huge responsibility and challenge to meet our developmental requirements and at the same time ensure that we remain committed to clean energy.
Through the contribution of each individual, we can achieve this task, which appears to be, if not impossible, but difficult.
India has been traditionally a fossil fuel driven energy economy.
In future, this trend is likely to change with our emphasis on solar energy and wind energy.
Today, the whole world has become inter-connected and we are citizens of a global village.
What happens in one part of the world, impacts the citizens in other parts of the world.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
We must remember that if we are educating one child for energy related issues, then we are educating an entire family of 4 to 5 people.
I will like to compliment the organizers for selecting this theme.
An important decision tool like this App, which enables the young minds to measure their efforts, will definitely lead to a truly empowered generation.
Each unit of energy saved is energy generated.
To that extent, this initiative will really help in augmenting the capacity building in the country through education and empowerment.
This school will now have its energy needs met from solar power.
I hope the Education Department of Government of Delhi will take this initiative forward and make Delhi a Clean and Green City.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I hope that the vitality and constructive outcome of the Energy Club will really galvanize the energy scenario of the country and in the near future India will definitely move a step forward in achieving energy security.
I would like to congratulate all the winners who have displayed their innovative ideas, projects and artworks.
Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Each geographic region and sub-region has its individual style and tradition that stems from the ancient life-rhythms of its society.
Our shilpkaars have, down the centuries, developed their own, often unique, methods and techniques of bringing life into stone and metal, sandalwood and clay.
They had, many centuries ago, perfected scientific and engineering processes far ahead of their times.
The creations of that time reveal their sophisticated knowledge and highly developed aesthetic sense.
Handicrafts entail low capital investment and facilitate environmental conservation.
They also empower disadvantaged segments like the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and minorities thus making development inclusive and sustainable.
Production of handicraft items holds particular significance in the economic empowerment of women living in the rural areas, as production is carried out in the house alongside other household chores.
Women form a large part of the work force and constitute more than half of the artisan sector.
Artmetal wares, wood wares, imitation jewellery, embroidered & crocheted goods and hand printed textiles & scarves constitute the bulk of our handicraft exports.
The domestic market is also shaping up well given the growth in the urban middle class.
However, inspite of these healthy growth figures, the handicraft industry in India is highly fragmented and the sector has been facing significant challenges mainly due to lack of design, innovation, technology upgradation, scarcity of raw materials, inadequate finance and increased competition from mill and factory made products.
The programme emphasizes an integrated approach for development of handicraft clusters.
The major thrust is on result oriented interventions focusing on empowering artisans through skill and technology upgradation, design development and supply of raw materials through easily accessible common facility centres at cluster level.
Developing and strengthening marketing linkages through various options such as direct sale, participation in sale expos and e-commerce is another major component of the new approach.
The eighty craftspersons who are the proud recipients of these Awards richly deserve this honour.
I once again take this opportunity to congratulate the awardees, and the entire handicrafts community, for their creative efforts and wish them the very best in their future endeavours.
Dear Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Over the years this award has inspired many Scouts and Guides and even others to work for community service and nation building.
Dear young friends,
Today almost every country in the world has presence of Scouting and Guiding organization.
Through its activities like community services, integration camps, exchange programs, outdoor activities, the Scout movement aims to inspire youth to contribute positively in the development of nation and the society.
Dear friends,
Today we live in a globally connected world.
For any progressive society, the citizens must possess an international outlook, modern perspective, digital and professional skills to steer the nation forward.
We need to involve and groom the youth of our country with this purpose and instill in them a spirit of brotherhood, love and compassion.
Today India is a young nation, with more than half of its population of the age of twenty-five years or less.
I am told that Scouts, Guides, Rangers and Rovers take part in Cultural Integration Programs, exchange programs not only within the country but also internationally.
I am sure you must have learnt to appreciate the diversity of cultures and the commonality of the values of brethren, friendship and humanity.
Dear Friends,
I am indeed happy to note that a team of Volunteers of Bharat Scouts & Guides had reached interior villages of earthquake hit Nepal to provide relief and rehabilitation, within 48 hours of the occurrence of the disaster in April, 2015.
The disaster preparedness programs conducted by the Scout Guide Movement have always helped the young people to act promptly during such emergencies to provide humanitarian aid.
I expect that you would not only participate yourself but also to motivate others to keep our public places clean and hygienic.
Start from your own house, your place of work, your school, colony where you live and you will find the difference.
You belong to the generation of digital revolution.
Starting from your family to your community, I expect you to spread the message of digital literacy.
When all of us shall join together in such initiatives, our country will march rapidly forward in the path of development and progress.
Dear Friends,
I am happy to learn that the members of Scout Guide Movement are also actively engaged in promoting awareness about domestic violence against women, child abuse and female feticide.
These are crucial issues that we face in our society.
I once again renew my call to the leaders of this Organization to commit themselves by their action to make it a globally-visible and self-reliant premium youth movement.
At the end, I once again congratulate all the award winners for their meritorious and outstanding service.
I offer the Bharat Scouts and Guides my felicitations and extend to you my good wishes for the continued success in all your endeavours.
Thank you
Jai Hind
I welcome the distinguished participants.
I am happy that representatives from countries in BRICS region and many emerging as well as developed economies have gathered in this Summit to deliberate on challenges facing the higher education sector and on the importance of global bench-marking of educational institutions.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The expansion of higher education network in India has enabled us to create access to higher education across the country.
However, the quality of education in our institutes of higher learning remains a big challenge.
I refused to believe that not a single university could come up to the standard required for being in the top two hundred universities in the international rankings.Takshashila, Nalanda, Vikramashila, Valabhi, Somapura and Odantapuri
One of the institutions is in the top 100 institutions in the engineering and technology category.
It is my firm belief that there are many higher education institutions in India that have the potential to become one of the best in the world.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Emerging economies facing the challenge of meeting the developmental aspirations of their citizens must build an educational system comparable to the best in the world.
A serious discourse on how to address the quality concerns in higher education should therefore begin at the earliest.
In the recent times, there has been a growing interest in world-class universities amongst scholars, institutional administrators and policy makers.
To meet bench-marks, institutions need to provide greater emphasis on quality research that is recognized globally.
This would help in their efforts to become world-class.
What is needed further is for such aspiring universities to reach out, communicate, exchange and encourage mobility of persons and ideas across the globe.
Adopting a world-view would help an institution getting accepted by the global community of higher education.
Some of them, to my mind, are high quality faculty members, meritorious students, an encouraging teaching learning environment, a high level of resource availability, sound infrastructure, and existence of considerable autonomy and robust governance structure.
Presence of these elements in an institution would automatically reflect in higher international rankings.
Many countries have therefore adopted their own ranking mechanism with parameters more suited to the domestic setting.
The National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) also operate in familiar territory, assessing and accrediting institutions of higher education in our country.
I believe these national counterparts of the international rankings system will only reinforce and concretize the push towards accountability and quality in educational institutions.
At the same time, they will inspire better performance of institutions leading to improved international rankings.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The combined strength of the five BRICS nations can develop an educational eco-system for their citizens as well as for the world citizens.
I hope that this Summit will come out with innovative solutions, with the cooperation of the private sector, for the emerging economies to further strengthen their higher education system and in the process emerge as leaders.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I am confident that this conclave will bring out new ideas and thoughts that are important for policy makers and educationists to build world class universities in the developing world.
I wish all the participants and delegates of this Summit a very successful outcome of their endeavour.
I welcome guests from outside India and wish for them not only a productive outcome of the Summit but also a comfortable stay amidst us.
I wish the Summit great success.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Dear Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is really a festival time here.
Arriving in Diu, I could feel the festive mood of the people, tourists and the City.
Winters in Diu, I am told, are very pleasant and enjoyable.
With clear and blue sea on one side, the setting is perfect for the festival.
I must compliment the Administration for conceptualizing this unique beach festival, one of its kind in India and Asia.
This is my first visit to this Union Territory and I must admit that this pristine island destination presents a serene spectacle, inspiring a profound sense of calmness.
Diu may be geographically small, but it holds immense possibilities to draw tourists from all parts of India and indeed the world.
I must congratulate the UT Administration and the residents of Diu for their efforts to make the city clean and ready for the grand beach festival.
Each part of India has a distinct cultural milieu which has evolved over centuries.
Today, as I was watching the fascinating Siddhi Dhamal dance, I could not help but reflect on the manner in which civilizations have mingled over millennia.
The dance of this special tribe is the perfect manifestation of the confluence of cultures which binds the people of India and Africa together.
Those were the days when sailors would set out from the Eastern seashore of Africa, across the Indian Ocean and reach the western shores of India.
Diu was once a thriving port and traders from Gujarat would carry textiles to Africa and return with Gold and Ivory.
This ethos of acceptance and assimilation has defined the Indian civilization and made it a melting pot of the world.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The Union Territory of Daman & Diu has a distinct heritage which makes it special part of India.
I recall that in 1961 Operation Vijay was launched by the Indian Army to liberate this territory from the colonial rule.
The whole nation felt a sense of pride as the people of this territory became part of the Indian Union along with Goa.
The journey of the people of Daman & Diu in the last five decades has seen much progress and development.
It is heartening to learn that the UT Administration has taken concrete measures in the area of solar power generation in Diu.
I am informed that Diu is striving to become the first city in the country to be completely run on solar energy.
This would be a model which other cities in the country could aspire for.
A modern cycle track which has been constructed in Diu is also a positive step towards green mobility.
Being a small island territory which is blessed with such a beauty, tourism has to be a key driver of the economy and a source of livelihood.
I am happy to note the concrete measures taken by the Administration to give a boost to tourism.
I am told that the enhanced air connectivity, with Air India commencing its operations, will give a major boost to tourism opportunities in the territory.
I feel that Diu can become a tourism gateway for southern Gujarat and Diu-Somnath-Gir are a natural tourism circuit.
Better connectivity and collaboration with Gujarat tourism will provide a greater fillip to the immense opportunities in this sector.
The Saurashtra region of Gujarat is also full of vibrant cultural and folk traditions and a boost to Diu tourism will also have a multiplier effect for development of tourism in the Saurashtra region.
Organizing special cultural festivals such as these would be a source of encouragement for the Indian folk and classical artists and ensure that our youth stay connected with our cultural traditions.
I am informed that last year nearly 17 lakh tourists visited Diu and with the consistent efforts of administration, this is likely to touch 25 lakh this year.
Dear Friends,
Diu has a unique locational advantage, blessed as it is with the bounty of nature.
Thousands of small fishermen depend on the ocean for their livelihood.
I am informed that the administration is taking measures for modernizing the fishing harbor at Diu.
I would also suggest that we explore the possibilities of greater value addition so that they get a better value for their catch.
While planning for the development of the region, the aspirations of the youth will also have to be taken care of.
Providing modern education, skill development and adequate and decent job opportunities should be one of the goals of the administration.
In the end, I would once again welcome everybody to the start of the Festa de Diu and wish the festival a grand success.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
This historic institution was founded in 1920 by Mahatma Gandhi, who was its Chancellor since inception and remained so till he breathed last.
Dr. Rajendra Prasad became the Chancellor of Gujarat Vidyapith after Gandhiji and Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel.
After him, the legacy was inherited by Morarji Desai, who served the longest term as Chancellor for 33 years.
The previous Chancellor Nararyan Desai was the son of Mahadev Desai, who spent his childhood and early youth with Gandhiji.
I am aware that some of my predecessors have graced this occasion in the past.
I consider it a special responsibility being amongst you all and addressing the graduating students of this unique seat of learning.
More so as, before coming here, I had the occasion to spend some time at the Sabarmati Ashram that Bapu had set up in 1917.
Dear students:
Gandhi was a rare visionary.
He created this university, which is going to complete one hundred years soon, because he realized that education and education of youth was a sound way to form the new world.
It today offers 12 courses at the graduation level, 9 at post-graduation, and 20 at M.Phil stage, besides diploma and certificate courses.SatyagrahaAhimsa
That 40 percent of the student population comprises girls is an encouraging sign.
The state and the society at large ought to continue supporting such a noble organization.
Friends:
This is needed to regenerate the country according to Gandhian ideals.
This institution has been specially mandated to educate youth for Gram Swaraj, which is a laudable goal espoused by Gandhiji.
He firmly held that India lived in her villages.
Intervention in food security, education, skill development, employment, technology dissemination, health and nutrition, housing, drinking water, and sanitation would go a long way to uplift the quality of rural life and address poverty concerns.
Initiatives such as this would help create self-reliant villages and achieve equity as well as economic and environmental sustainability.
It is noteworthy that students of this institute through their own labour have kept the campus clean.
Such traditions in community life are not built in a day.
Friends:
This institute should continue to demonstrate that it is by educating the heart and mind of the youth that social rejuvenation on the path of non-violence is possible.
In this context, I compliment Gujarat Vidyapith for having brought out a digital version of the Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi in collaboration with the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
This will enable wider dissemination of Gandhian thought and philosophy amongst people.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
On the one hand, there is need for increasing access and making education affordable.
On the other, there is need to ensure quality and pursue excellence.
These are not contradictory objectives but complementary goals.
Quality consciousness must be at the back of every initiative in our higher academic institutions.
Many meritorious students leave the shores of our country and study abroad due to lack of institutes in India conforming to high standards of education.
Not many international students come to India for higher studies either.
We must do all at our end to reverse this trend and make India emerge as a quality and affordable education destination for students outside.
Quality and relevant research can help tide over our socio-economic problems.
To build a research eco-system, we need to adopt a multi-disciplinary approach, promote research at under-graduate level and develop scientific temper in the students.
Despite focused attention on innovation in recent years, India lags behind many countries on this front.
An efficient set-up for mentoring innovative ideas and nurturing grassroots innovations could see our country surge ahead in innovation.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Demographic dividend can occur only if greater number of competent and skilled professionals is produced by our higher educational and technical institutions.
This calls for skill development initiatives on a massive scale.
For that, cooperation amongst our institutes is necessary.
Technology must be leveraged to bring greater number of youth in the skill net.
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) has become a preferred mode of learning due to its merits of scale, speed and cost.
Interactive MOOCs can offer vocational aspirants equal opportunity to learn.
Such an initiative can revolutionize delivery of skills knowledge and revamp vocational education in the country.
Skilling efforts would also call for fusion of traditional technology with cutting-edge technology.
I am told that Gujarat Vidyapith educates students incharkha and computer with equal enthusiasm.
I am sure they will put their training to good use and become worthy citizens of our nation.charkha
Dear students:
Apply the Gandhian principles at every stage of your life.
With the distinct training ofHeart, Hand and Head which is Nai Talim, the onus is on you to construct aSamarth Bharat.
I wish everyone gathered here the very best for the future.Heart, Hand and HeadNai TalimSamarth Bharat
Jai Hind.
Thank you.
I am happy to be amidst you today in this prestigious institute which has excelled in higher education and provided leadership for the management and business education in the country.
It has excelled in academics and given the best of the management talent to India and to the whole world.
Today, you can find the alumni of IIM-Ahmedabad working in corporates, governments, public services and in many other areas.
The alumni of this institute have expanded the brand IIM-Ahmedabad globally.
Today, I call upon the faculty, students, and alumni of IIM-Ahmedabad to continue to engage with creative minds from industry, business, entrepreneurs, society leaders and with those who work at the grassroots.
It must strive to be a beacon of knowledge, nurture other institutions with generous mentorship, and maintain a culture that blends the drive for excellence and performance with the spirit of collaboration and compassion.
This is one of the ways to readily bring the innovations in the market.
For this to happen, I have been encouraging the institutes of higher learning to collaborate with the institutes and industry within India and abroad for creating a conducive ecosystem for nurturing innovation and research.
I hope that these kinds of industry-academia collaborations will help the academic institutions in aligning their activities with the needs of the industry and society.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am happy that IIM-Ahmedabad is mentoring IIM-Nagpur to create a new leader in the field of management education.
Today, this institute has taken a leadership role in making suggestions for improving higher education system in India and for nurturing innovation ecosystem.
I wish you all a great future and hope that you will spare no effort in contributing towards inclusive development of India.
At the outset, let me congratulate AMUL for achieving yet another milestone in its illustrious journey.
Gujarat is a historical land having major sites dating back to the ancient Indus Valley Civilization.
Lothal is considered to be one of the earliest seaports in the world.
Coastal cities like Bharuch and Khambat were important trading centres in the Maurya and Gupta empires.
Some of the tallest leaders of the movement belonged to this region.
The Sabarmati Ashram of Mahatma Gandhi served as the nerve centre of the freedom movement.
This has been possible due to the industrious and enterprising nature of the Gujarati people.
The state has some of the largest industrial corporations while its agricultural growth is amongst the highest in the country.
It is the forerunner of the cooperative movement in the dairy sector.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The arrangement was satisfactory to all parties except the farmers for whom the exploitative conditions at the hands of milk contractors continued.
A fifteen-day milk strike when not a drop of milk was sold to the milk merchants turned successful.
Its objective was to provide proper marketing facilities for the milk producers of the district.
AMUL Dairy began pasteurizing milk in June 1948 for the Bombay Milk Scheme with a handful of farmers in two village co-operative societies producing about 250 litres a day.
However by the end of 1948, 432 farmers had joined village societies.
The quantity of milk handled by AMUL Dairy increased to 5,000 litres a day.
He preferred to spend a night in a village at Kheda district interacting with farmers.
The prevailing milk shortage in the country and import dependence for dairy commodities prompted him to replicate the AMUL model on a much wider scale.
This task was entrusted to Dr. Verghese Kurien who was then managing AMUL.
This apex marketing body has 3.6 million dairy farmers in Gujarat with an average daily milk procurement of 16 million litres and annual turnover of over 22,000 crore rupees.
AMUL is today the largest liquid milk brand in Asia and the largest food brand in India.
Through logistics innovation, AMUL has ensured easy availability of high-quality, packaged milk and dairy products across the country.
In the last one year, the sharp decline in global dairy commodity prices has reduced milk prices to dairy farmers by 20 to 50 percent worldwide.
In pleasant contrast I am told, farmers associated with AMUL Dairy have received higher prices for the milk they have poured into their cooperative.
These efforts have brought smiles in the faces of Indian farmers, improving their quality of life while meeting the nutritional requirements of the nation.
Breakthrough dairy technology enabled AMUL to spray-dry buffalo milk into products such as cheese, butter, condensed milk and baby food.
For the health and well-being of the cattle population, it started a mobile veterinary dispensary in 1950.
For meeting the nutritional requirements of cattle, it established the cattle feed plant in 1964 where the technology of cattle feed in pellet form ensured its efficient usage.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
For instance, the long distance transportation of milk in India has been made possible through the National Milk Grid.
This process innovation has helped liquid milk and milk products find better markets in the country.
The Government has now prioritized its support for the dairy sector through a National Dairy Plan, being managed by NDDB.
Given that the productivity of our milch animals is still low compared to global standards, an outlay of 2,242 crore rupees will be invested in the first phase of the plan.
It is expected that the resultant growth in milk production will fully meet the estimated growth in demand for milk and milk products in our country.
However, for the cooperative sector to flourish in the entire country, the Union and State governments can further help by providing a level-playing field, in terms of their macro-economic policies.
Friends:
It is a model worth emulating, the followership of which could address problems in other areas faced by our farming community.
The onus is on the current generation of farmer-leaders, professionals and other stakeholders to expand the AMUL movement in a way that benefits farmers across the board.
I urge you all to ensure that this world-class institution continues to progress with the same passion and commitment, and with the same values of integrity, efficiency and honesty which the founding fathers had instilled in AMUL.
With the starting of this modern plant today, AMUL would revolutionize cattle feed manufacturing to address the nutritional requirements of the cattle population.
I once again compliment you on this occasion and wish Godspeed for your endeavours.
Thank you.
They have a rich history of professional excellence and have served the Nation with honour and distinction in peace and during the two wars.
The Nation honours them today with a deep sense of gratitude and appreciation for their selfless devotion, professionalism and courage in the face of adversity.
I compliment the Air-Warriors on parade for their impeccable turnout and outstanding precision of movements.
I am happy to see a well coordinated fly past and an immaculate aerobatic display.
Though we remain firmly committed to peace, we will use all our might to protect the sovereignty of our Nation, and I am confident that our valiant men and women in uniform will rise to the occasion.
Our Armed Forces, exemplified by the Air-Warriors who stand before us, reflect our steely resolve to defend our interests.
Excellent performance of its personnel in international exercises, both at home and abroad, is indeed a glowing testimony to the level of training and preparedness of our Air Force.
The Indian Air Force, besides safeguarding the sovereign skies of our Nation, has also been at the forefront of all humanitarian aid and disaster relief operations, most notably Op Rahat and the recent earthquake in Nepal.
The resilience and tenacity displayed by our valiant Air-Warriors is a great source of pride for the Nation.
Whether flying the Gnats or the lethal MiG-27 ML aircraft, the Squadron has an enviable operational record.
On this occasion I take the opportunity to compliment the personnel and families of 18 Squadron and 22 Squadron, past and present, for their selfless sacrifice and service to the Nation.
The Nation is indeed proud of you.
I wish you and your families the very best and a glorious future.
Jai Hind!
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We welcome you all to the first ever International Conference of Indologists being hosted at the Rashtrapati Bhavan.
I wanted the thoughts and perspectives that emerge from such informed exchanges to enlighten and inspire - for there cannot be a conversation about India that does not do so.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Ancient India had world-renowned seats of higher learning.
For about eighteen hundred years beginning 6thcentury BC, Indian universities like Takshashila, Nalanda, Vikramashila, Valabhi, Somapura and Odantapuri had dominated the world education system.
Indian scholarship, which had already achieved great heights, fascinated all who encountered it.
From Megasthenes to Hiuen Tsang, Fa Hien, Hyecho and Al-Barauni, these scholars of Indian studies spread their understanding of India near and far.
His works on Indology command great respect.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The global popularization of yoga will help to improve the lifestyle of those who adopt it and pro-actively safeguard their physical and mental well-being.
I would like to encourage the younger generation of the world to study, practice and benefit from Ayurveda and other ancient Indian healing systems.
I look forward to the increasing integration of this science into a holistic treatment of diseases.
I would also like to see more Indology in the academic collaborations between India and her foreign partners.
This will not only add new dimensions to the bilateral discourse of India with these friendly countries, but it will also create yet another layer of co-operation and mutual understanding.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
I am happy to learn that Department of Electronics and Information Technology has collaborated with Intel India to run this competition that aims to identify, support and mentor companies with workable IT solutions to problems in various sectors like health care, education and e-governance.
I am sure that the Innovative Solutions presented today would be developed to benefit the citizens of the country.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The digital revolution has in a way decentralized the governance.
One does not necessarily need a very big company or even the government to think and bring solutions to all the problems.
Today, any innovation happening anywhere in the country or world can be replicated and adopted suitably on large scale.
Indian civilization has been known for innovations.
I am glad to see that our government has joined hand with IT giants like Intel and Academic Institutions like IIM Ahmedabad to crowd source Ideas, incubate, fund and mentor them to make them workable and replicable.
Bright Idea may come from a single source, but to see it fructify into action is our collective responsibility.
Dear friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
This connectivity will enable the hinterland of our country to become part of the digital revolution and benefit from it.
Another important goal of spreading digital literacy and education to all will have to be pursued vigorously because we cannot afford digital divide in our society if we aspire to become economically stronger and inclusive.
The third and most important goal of providing services on demand, will require innovation to build solutions, test them and make them popular.
This certainly requires, coming together of the government, individuals, Academic and Research institutions and Entrepreneurs.
It will continue to bring forth affordable, workable and innovative solutions to the problems of the common man.
Dear Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Thank you
Jai Hind
This organization of serving and retired officers of the Indian Armoured Corps conducts this Lecture annually to pay tribute to a decorated soldier of the Corps.
I take this opportunity to pay my homage to Major Narag and other Indian soldiers who laid down their lives in the War.
Major Narag made the supreme sacrifice for the nation in the battle of Garibpur.
In this Memorial Lecture, I have been asked to share my perceptions about the formation of Bangladesh.
Let me begin with an explanation.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
What happened in 1971 is recorded in contemporary history.
However, in the second half of the previous century, they imbibed lessons from history and decided to work together.
They created a common market and a common currency.
They created a European Union and a European Parliament.
One of the most important inventions which have changed the world is the Internet, which is a product of the peace dividend in Europe.
In the last thirty years, we have created many mechanisms and institutions on the model of the European Union.
It is however widely accepted that the full potential of SAARC is yet to be realized.
As I have often said, we can change our friends but not our neighbours.
It is for us to decide if we want to live in a state of perpetual tension or develop together in an atmosphere of peace and harmony.
We must look at a shared future leaving behind the divisions of the past.
We are two nations bound by the threads of history, religion, culture, language and kinship.
Our growing cooperation is a picture of shared prosperity amongst neighbours.
With Bangladesh, we now need to recapture the spirit of the Liberation War of 1971 to build a new future..
Its food grains output is around 34 million tonnes.
Its growth rate has been over 6 percent in last 15 years.
Bangladesh has pioneered a social revolution with significant achievements in women's empowerment, child health care, women's health care and immunization.
Like India, it is a young country with more than 50 percent of population below 24 years.
Once again like us, Bangladesh is focused on developing the ICT and Services Sector.
Indo-Bangladesh trade at over 7 billion US Dollars makes Bangladesh our second largest trading partner in South Asia.
Power supply from India to Bangladesh, which commenced in October 2013, is expected to grow from 500 MW to 1100 MW within two years.
Friends:
We have launched three bus services that will connect our citizens more easily.
I firmly believe that connectivity by road, rail, rivers, sea, transmission lines, petroleum pipelines and digital links must increase.
Regional connectivity and cooperation between Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Nepal must also be deepened.
These are significant steps forward which have been enabled by the close cooperation and frequent interaction of senior leaders of the two countries.
Regular exchanges and wide dialogue between our two peoples are important to enhance our mutual understanding and goodwill.
South Asia should become an integrated market.
A seamless assembly line as well as regional value chains for global markets should be created.
Indian and Bangladesh businessmen are already collaborating in fields such as readymade garments, textiles, leather and pharmaceuticals.
There exists huge potential for doing same in food processing, light engineering goods, ship building and auto components.
These will make Bangladesh economy more competitive and increase exports.
It is for this reason that the two Governments have agreed to cooperate to set up an Indian Special Economic Zone in Bangladesh.
This is another big step forward towards restoring historic connections between our business communities, which will serve both well.
There is huge untapped potential to develop renewable energy like solar and wind.
It will also open new economic doors for India's Northeast.
It will enable our two countries to integrate South Asia and connect it with the dynamic East.
Friends:
His leadership and sacrifices gave birth to Bangladesh.
Today, his daughter Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina is leading Bangladesh to greater and greater heights of glory.
I am confident the coming days will see a significant intensification of co-operation to eradicate poverty, enhance growth, promote trade and investment as well as fight the forces of terrorism, extremism and fundamentalism.
I wish you Godspeed in your endeavours.
Distinguished Members of the Indian Community,
It is a great privilege for me to be the first Indian President to make a State Visit to Israel.
Indians all over the world are successful not only as dedicated professionals and hard working businessmen, but also as model citizens.
In fact, West Asia as a whole and the Gulf have always been a priority for India.
Not only do we have ancient and civilisational ties with these lands and peoples, but today, some 7 million Indians live and work here.
We shall continue to pay special attention to them and seek closer cooperation and stronger partnership with them for our mutual benefit.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The potential of India now has a stronger resonance.
Our circle of friends has expanded.
Our future partnership must prioritise co-operation in innovation and research.
Eminent Vice Chancellors of premier Indian Universities have accompanied me on this visit.
Their Universities look forward to close exchanges with Israeli Universities.
I am confident that our hard working students will do India proud in Israel.
Friends,
In Mumbai you have contributed leaders in business, education and the literary field.
In Kolkata, the Magen David Synagogue and the Jewish Girl's School are historic landmarks.
I recall that in 1968, former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi had attended the 400th anniversary of the synagogue and released a commemorative stamp.
I understand that all the four Jewish communities in Israel have come together to host a National Convention of Indian Jews in Israel.
We are two countries with ancient civilisations, much like the two branches of a bountiful tree.
Members of the Faculty and the academic community,
Distinguished guests,
I thank the President of the Al-Quds University for his generous words.
I would like to begin by reciprocating his warm sentiments.
I am touched by the gesture of this prestigious University in conferring upon me an Honorary Doctorate.
In this, it has been inspired by the vision that only an educated and enlightened citizenry can safeguard the future of Palestine.
Your pursuit of scientific knowledge and advanced research places this University at the centre of Palestine's national development programme.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is therefore a great privilege for me to have this opportunity of visiting you.
We recognized the PLO as the sole and legitimate representative of the Palestinian people in 1974; India was the first non-Arab country to recognize the State of Palestine in 1988.
India supported the successful resolution for flying the Palestinian flag at the UN Headquarters last month.
We congratulate the people of Palestine on the momentous unfurling of their national flag at the United Nations - for the first time in history - on September 30, 2015.
India then voted in favour of UN General Assembly Resolution in October 2003 against construction of the separation wall by Israel and supported subsequent resolutions of the UNGA in this regard.
India voted in favour of accepting Palestine as a full member of UNESCO.
One of the aims of my visit to Palestine is to suggest a framework for the future of our relationship.
While we continue to follow our traditional policy on Palestine, we see that the framework of our partnership can be reinforced through three principal pillars.
First, closer political interaction;
Second, deeper economic engagement and academic collaboration;
Peace and stability in the region is in India's interest.
Today the speed with which an event happening in one place of the world triggers a response in another, is unprecedented in terms of its impact and scale.
There are a number of areas of convergence in our relationship which we may step up further by intensifying our exchange of information.
At the multilateral level, we have already started the process with the League of Arab States.
I know that brand India is popular here and inspires trust.
India can facilitate your journey from being consumers to manufacturers.
We are confident of the abundant talent and entrepreneurship of the Palestinian people.
Apart from our bilateral trade in goods, there is vast scope for trade in services.
India's strength in IT and IT-enabled services as well as consultancy can pave the way for greater engagement in the IT sector.
I had the privilege to inaugurate the India-Palestine Center for Excellence in ICT today.
It will have a satellite centre in Ramallah and forward linkages with industry.
India will build a similar Center in Gaza.
We look forward to the success of the Techno-Park in Ramallah.
It will be jointly built and operated by the Palestine Investment Fund and the Indian public and private sector.
Friends,
India has always been happy to partner Palestine in promoting education.
Over the years, around 12,000 Palestinian students have graduated from Indian Universities, many of them on scholarships offered by the Government of India.
It gives me great pleasure to announce that my Government has decided to increase the number of these scholarships from 10 to 25 per annum.
We are glad to have built the Jawaharlal Nehru Secondary School for Girls in Asira Al-Shamaliya.
Today, I will inaugurate the Jawaharlal Nehru Secondary School for Boys in Abu Dees.
This interaction marks a quantum leap in our academic relations.
As of date, 760 Palestinian nationals have availed training under this scheme.
I am happy to announce that the Government of India has increased the ITEC slots for Palestine from 50 to 100 per annum.
Both our peoples cherish the fact that our cultural connections go back to our ancient history.
The Indian Hospice located in East Jerusalem bears testimony to this fact.
I look forward to your continued friendship and fruitful exchanges with India.
The youth of Palestine are the future leaders of this country.
May you flourish and take your nation to new heights of progress and prosperity.
I wish all of you every success in your academic careers and a very bright future.
Thank you!
Your Excellency, President Mahmoud Abbas, President of the State of Palestine,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is indeed a great privilege to be here on the first State Visit to Palestine by an Indian President.
I deeply appreciate the warm welcome and the generous hospitality accorded to me and my delegation.
Your Excellency, the Palestinian leadership have displayed great faith and trust in relations with India.
We share your pride and joy on this momentous occasion and also your sense of optimism that this is an important step towards the realization of the dream of the people of Palestine for a separate homeland.
Your Excellency, peace and stability in the region is in India's interest.
We share the perception that resolution of the longstanding Palestinian issue will contribute to the peace and stability of the region.
India supports a negotiated solution, resulting in a sovereign, independent, viable and united State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We would like to see the people of Palestine living within secure and recognized borders, side by side and at peace with Israel, as endorsed in the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map and relevant United Nations Security Council Resolutions.
Diplomacy and statesmanship have to prevail over hatred and violence in the search for lasting and durable peace.
Thank you!
Your Excellency, Mr. Labib Al Khadra, Minister of Higher Education & Scientific Research,
Your Excellency, Professor Dr. Ekhleif Tarawneh, President of the University of Jordan,
Members of the Faculty and distinguished members of the academic community,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I feel honoured to address this distinguished gathering at the prestigious University of Jordan, one of the oldest andmostacclaimed centres of learning in the world.
I am deeply movedby this gesture.
I value it as a manifestation of the warmth of the people of Jordan towards me and my country.
I have long been aware of the grand reputation of the University of Jordan.
I have heard of its contribution in the building of a knowledge society in this country.
Its role in promoting fundamental human values, academic freedom, learning and innovation has been second to none.
Today, as I address you, and through you, the people of Jordan, I feel that I could not have chosen a better venue than this esteemed institution.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
This mutual sentiment has beenur relationship has been further enhanced by the excellent understanding between our Governments on regional and global issues and our support for each other in multilateral fora including the United Nations.
Our convergence of views on Palestine, the Middle East Peace Process, Syria, Iraq and the challenges confronting us in this region today - and our agreement on the need to expedite UNSC reforms reflect our common approach to these important issues.
Our ties are ancient and civilisational.
Our bilateral relations with Israel are independent of our relations with Palestine.
We have been happy to provide budgetary, economic and developmental assistance to Palestine.
We are saddened by the tragic loss of lives and the long suffering of millions of displaced citizens - including innocent women and children.
India believes that Syria has a key and fundamentalpart to playin achieving peace and stability inWest Asia.Prolonged conflict in Syria has already begun to have a severe impact on the region and beyond.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
We know that Arab masters translated and preserved teachings from Greece, India and Persia, inspiring a mass movement in the field of education during the 12th Century.
This resurgence produced the great Arab mathematicians, scientists and scholars.
Regular cross pollination of theories and concepts inspired thought, exploration and discoveries that changed the world.
We, in India, cherished these invaluable exchanges and collaborations that enriched our traditions of learning, culture, religion, language and people to people contacts.
The weakening of these links over the decades due to a variety of reasons can certainly be remedied.
A re-connect of Arab and Asian ideas and culture will undoubtedly enrich humanity once again.
There is wide popular support in both our countries for enhancing our relations.
My visit reflects India's deep interest in strengthening our partnership with Jordan in every field.
It is a vindication of your investment in these values that you have succeeded in building a modern, inclusive and pluralistic nation while the rest of the region remains entrapped in continuous cycles of conflict and instability.
Our strongest focus should remain on human resource development.
We are happy to have partnered Jordan in training its students and professionals in India.
I am told that the Jordanian alumni of various Indian universities are now 2500 strong.
Our educational systems mustupgradeand fine tune themselves to better equip our youth for employment.
The knowledge economy is an area where we can have promising collaborations.
Friends, as Visitor of 114 institutions of higher education in India, I am deeply committed to fostering educational exchanges and cross pollination of ideas.
Accompanying my official delegation are the Vice Chancellors of prominent Indian Universities and educational institutions in India.
I am happy to see that Delhi University and the University of Jordan have signed an MOU for co-operation today.
Several other Indian universities and premier institutions have also entered into understandings with their Jordanian counterparts.
I am told that the University of Petra and Talal Abu Ghazaleh University are already in successful partnerships.
Similar tie-ups for providing online education, could, if encouraged, afford vast opportunities for fruitful collaborations.
India seeks greater Foreign Direct Investment in the insurance, construction, defence and railways sectors.
Our priorities are healthcare, IT & IT-enabled services, financial services, transport and logistics.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Instability in our neighbourhood can threaten our security and slow down our progress.
At a time when the entire world is affected by the scourge of terrorism, it is important to recognize that India has been preoccupied with this menace for over four decades.
Terrorism emanating from our neighbourhood remains a major security threat to us.
We believe that addressing this challenge should be a major priority of the international community.
Indiawould like to see a collective effort by all the member States of the United Nations for the early conclusion and adoption of the Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism.
It has been pending for over a decade.
This Comprehensive Convention would serve the cause of humanity by prohibiting States from facilitating or allowing their territories to be used for terrorist acts.
It would enable States to cooperate in suppressing terrorism and in punishing the perpetrators, abettors, financiers, facilitators and collaborators of terrorism.
I am happy to share that I am convinced that under the guidance of His Majesty, King Abdullah II, Jordan will definitely reap the positive outcomes of all the efforts made for the development and progress of its people.
The world also looks forward to the healing and renewal of the other great communities of this region.
I wish His Majesty and the Government of Jordan every strength and unmitigated success as they provide leadership to this process.
We both realise that we must seize the present opportune moment to work together and collaborate for our mutual benefit.
The understandings that have been reached during my visit will undoubtedly enhance our mutual understanding and take our co-operation to new levels.
I wish all the students gathered here today every success in their academic careers.
May your endeavours for peace and nation-building be fruitful.
Thank you.
Your Royal Highness, Princess Wizdan,
Members of Parliament of Jordan,
Ambassador of India, Shri Anil Trigunayat
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am delighted to be here in Jordan on the very first State Visit by a President of India.
At the very outset, I would like to offer you warm greetings of the Government and people of India.
We have been looking forward to meeting you all.
Although it is only a few hours since our arrival, I am sure I speak for my entire delegation when I say that our day has been memorable.
The affection and goodwill that has been showered on us by the people of Amman since we arrived has made a lasting impression on us.
Ambassador Trigunayat tells me that the Indian community and Jordanian friends, many of whom are present here today, have been playing an exceptional role in cementing the co-operation between Jordan and India.
I have been made aware that the Indian community in Jordan have always been made to feel welcome and comfortable here.
I thank His Majesty, King Abdullah II and the Government and friendly people of Jordan for creating an environment that has enabled our people to flourish and whole heartedly contribute to the progress and development of this great nation.
The Government and people of India, too, bear the greatest goodwill and affection for the people of Jordan and look forward to taking forward our relations in all areas of common interest.
I would like to share with you that I have had very good discussions with His Majesty, King Abdullah II today.
I took the opportunity to thank His Majesty for the humanitarian assistance extended by Jordan in the evacuation of Indians from Iraq in the midst of the Gulf Crisis in 1991 and then again in 2014 when they fled from the troubled situation in Iraq.
We, in India, greatly value the personal contribution of His Majesty and his Government to the enhancing of relations between Jordan and India.
India is a fast-growing economy and expanding market.
This is, therefore, an opportune moment for our two nations to identify synergies and build on them for the mutual benefit of our peoples.
I will meet Prime Minister Dr. Abdullah Ensour and Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Nasser Judeh tomorrow.
I will have the honour of representing the people of India at the naming of a prominent street after Mahatma Gandhi.
This gesture is not only a tribute to the Father of our nation, but also a recognition of the enduring relevance of his universal message of peace and non violence.
Friends, we in India consider the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to be an oasis of peace and progress in this region.
We laud the progressive policies of His Majesty the King and deeply appreciate his humanity in offering refuge to almost one and a half million innocent men, women and children who have been displaced from their homes by the ravages of war.
We appreciate his efforts and tireless endeavours within this region and beyond to inculcate tolerance and understanding amongst communities.
We believe that it is urgent and imperative for all sides to give up sectarian violence and hatred and, instead, embrace tolerance, humanity and harmonious coexistence.
Friends, like Jordan, India is a young nation.
Almost 10 million young Indians join the job market every year.
Both our nations are favourably placed to harness the unprecedented demographic dividend accruing to us.
In order to create a conducive economic environment for achieving high and sustainable rates of growth over the next few decades, Government of India is focused on simplifying procedures, introducing greater accountability, enhancing informed decision making and rationalising our laws and regulations.
I understand Jordan has also been taking similar measures to fulfil a similar commitment to its youth.
However, even as governments implement facilitating measures, greater trade can be realised only if businesses on both sides participate wholeheartedly in this process.
To this end, we, in India, are committed to furthering our ongoing co-operation with Jordan in areas of shared interest and complementarities.
The MOUs and agreements for co-operation that will be signed during my visit will surely contribute to the efforts of our Governments in providing an expanded institutional framework for an efficient and result oriented engagement.
I am happy to learn that large Indian business delegations have participated in Trade fairs in Jordan and after the recently held Joint Commission meeting; the first Indo-Jordan CEOs Business Forum will be held in New Delhi later in the year.
India has emerged as the 4th largest trading partner of Jordan and is one of the main importer of rock phosphates, potash and finished fertilizers from here.
The state of the art JIFCO Joint Venture project is an example of our successful collaboration.
I have been told that Jordan is keen to see greater participation of Indian companies in a variety of areas such as transportation, Renewable Energy, IT and IT enabled services and Pharmaceutical sectors.
I would encourage Indian investors to consider these avenues of cooperation.
We look forward to your full support and contribution to towards this end.
With these words, Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish to reiterate how delighted I am to see your optimism and commitment towards reinforcing the ties between India and Jordan.
I wish you success.
Jai Hind.
In India, the life expectancy of people has gradually risen over the years.
From 59 years in 1990, the life expectancy at birth has increased to 66 years in 2013.
World over, the population of the aged is increasing.
India is no exception.
The phenomenon of age dependency will strengthen in the years to come.
This will give rise to a host of issues which needs to be dealt in a more comprehensive manner and with a greater sense of urgency.
Older persons cannot wait indefinitely as time is also running out for them.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
There is a need to sensitize various strata of the society towards the challenges being faced by the elderly people.
Social isolation, neglect, and lack of love, care and emotional support are the major deprivations generally faced by the older people.
The younger generation must be willing to give more respect, love and care to the elderly, not only in their own family but also in the society at large.
There is need to strengthen social bonding between the generations.
Combination of adverse health conditions such as these can have serious implications on the physical, emotional and economic well-being of our senior citizens.
If an elderly person is unable to secure specialized medical care due to lack of affordability or accessibility, it will compound the hardships already being faced by him or her.
It is important that institutions to provide geriatric care be established, strengthened and made more affordable for the common man.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
They are considered as the most valuable part of the family.
We must not let this socio-cultural asset of ours wither away.
The societal transformation from joint to nuclear families notwithstanding, we must encourage in the younger lot the ability and keenness to facilitate ageing in their own homes.
To realize this, the availability of geriatric care givers at affordable cost must be ensured.
Institutions to provide training and skill acquisition in this field must be established in States where their deficiency or absence exists.
Young people must be sensitized to acquire necessary skill and training.
This would ensure that the ability of nuclear families to take proper care of senior citizens is not impeded by shortage of trained geriatric care givers.
States and local bodies must take the lead in ensuring that adequate mechanism to provide institutional care to the aged is available within the reach of the needy.
The voluntary sector as well as the corporate sector must also be encouraged to set up institutional care centres to make available comprehensive care including geriatric healthcare facilities to the inmates.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
However in the backdrop of changing socio-economic conditions, the effectiveness and efficacy of these laws have to be constantly evaluated.
If found necessary, the legal provisions have to be re-visited and requisite modifications carried out.
A robust legal framework implemented with vigour would help ensure the safety, security and well-being of elderly persons in our country.
By sharing their experience and wisdom, senior citizens can contribute towards the betterment of the society in no small measure.
I wish all senior citizens of our society, particularly those who are present here, good health and happiness.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Iam happy to be amidst you to share this significant moment in your life.
At the outset, I would like to congratulate those who have completed their degree programme from this prestigious Institute.
I would also like to thank the management for inviting me to this Institute named after Sir M. Visvesvaraya, an eminent engineer, planner and statesman of our country.
I am happy that this Institute has taken steps to realize his philosophy and to sensitize the students to technology enhancement and social causes.
I am confident that all the students passing out from this Institute will imbibe the ideals, vision, philosophy and professional qualities of Sir Visvesvaraya.
Dear students,
You all have worked hard to acquire knowledge, technology and skills through the programme of the Institute.
While achieving this, you might have undergone pressures, ups and downs and anxious moments.
On this significant day in your life, you would be experiencing a certain joy and happiness to see your perseverance, hard work and commitment being translated into achievement of your goals and objectives.
I am happy that all of you will now enter the professional field to become part of an active and skilled work force and will also add to the technical prowess of our nation.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
We have always emphasized the role of science and technology in solving the problems of society.
We have to effectively utilize the power of education, the strength of science and technology in the right direction to bring positive transformation in society.
You, as graduates of this Institute, have the responsibility for ushering in societal transformation using the knowledge of science and technology which you have acquired.
It brings in fast paced changes making it difficult, many a times, to keep pace with the evolving technological environment.
The pace of change in technology makes the continuous learning process even more challenging.
Today, after passing out from the hallowed portals of this Institute, I would urge all of you to continuously keep updating your knowledge and skills to deliver substantive outcomes for your organization, society and country.
I am sure the faculty members of this Institute have empowered you to overcome myriad challenges and become successful leaders in whatever field of work you may decide to work in.
Friends,
Technologists integrate their knowledge of the physical sciences with more abstract realms beyond the boundaries of current technology in all areas of life.
The success of this initiative will depend on how innovatively we can use the technology as well as human resources available in our country.
I call upon you, the young technologists, that instead of looking for job opportunities, you may aim to become entrepreneurs, who create job opportunities for people.
Through your start-ups and entrepreneurships you can create enterprises, which will create wealth for the nation, society and people.
Indian institutions have done remarkably well and I will like to take this opportunity to congratulate the faculty members and staff of these institutions.
I am sharing this information to highlight the entrepreneurial capacity of our institutions and their potential to transform India through innovation and indigenization.
The NITs, as institutes of national importance, have to take a lead in creating the capacity for innovation and entrepreneurship and align it with the national development goals.
I would like to call upon your institute to take a lead in this direction.
Competitive advantage can be derived from an eco-system conducive to new learning, research and innovation.
I am sure that VNIT, Nagpur which is following the footprints of the technology visionary, Sir M. Visvesvaraya, will take a lead in creating an eco-system for entrepreneurship and innovation amongst the NITs.
Friends,
I congratulate all the students who have become graduates today.
I am sure you will make all of us proud of your achievements in the years to come.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
You can devote a few hours of your precious time to contribute towards community mobilization, awareness creation, promotion of Swachh practices through multiple platforms, and other philanthropic activities including community adoption.
It is necessary that you are engaged not only once but continuously, because the task at hand calls for sustained effort.
I am pleased to see the firm commitment to the mission and look forward to the involvement of all citizens of India in this essential task.
Let us become the nation that he dreamed of.
Jai Hind.
It is indeed appropriate that the Gandhi Peace Prize for 2014 is being conferred on the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) in recognition of its services in transforming India through the use of space technology and space based services.
The relevance of space research was questioned by many at that time.
Countering the challenges of scarce resources, limited technical manpower and physical infrastructure in the early years, ISRO has today established operational space systems and services, attained self-reliance in development of indigenous technology and accomplished exemplary feats in space exploration.
The recent launch of five satellites of the United Kingdom marked a new milestone in demonstrating the performance and reliability of the PSLV.
ISRO has also successfully built the Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) with an indigenous cryogenic engine.
India is the fourth country in the world after USA, Japan and the European Union to offer such services.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
These applications address social, economic and cultural aspects of Indian society and provide inputs for informed decision-making at various levels.
Rural Education and HealthRural Education and Health
The SITE transmissions had a significant impact on Indian villages and paved the path for use of advanced satellite broadcasting technology to fulfil the socio-economic needs of the country.
Our satellite based networks are today playing a key role in taking education, health care and rural connectivity to the remotest parts of our country.
India, on account of widely varying geo-climatic conditions, has always been vulnerable to natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes and cyclones.
Meteorological satellites are used extensively to monitor weather events and forecast weather, including the genesis of cyclones, their track and landfall prediction.
This helps minimize damage to life and property.
The value added products generated using satellite imagery help address information needs of all phases of disaster management such as preparedness, early warning, response, relief, rehabilitation, recovery and mitigation.
Millions of people living along the 7500 km long coastline in India are dependent on fishing for their livelihood.
As fish stocks dwindle and move further offshore, search time, cost and effort increase for fishermen.
Satellite based fishing zone advisories are made available in local languages on a daily basis to the fishing community resulting in enhanced fish catches, reduced search times and resultant savings in fuel costs, thereby improving the well-being and quality of life of our fishermen.
So we have to handover to them at least as it was handed over to us
Space applications have been suitably adapted to respond to the needs of integrated watershed development in the country, conservation of soil and water resources, and protection of the environment.
They have helped draw up developmental plans for enhancing agricultural production in rain-fed areas leading to rural prosperity.
Developmental plans drawn up at micro-watershed level using remote sensing images have resulted in increase in cropping intensity and crop yield, decrease in fallow lands, reclamation of wastelands, increase in irrigated crops and livelihood improvements.
Mahatma Gandhi had advocated democratic decentralization and Panchayati Raj where each village was responsible for its own affairs.
Under this programme, state-wise thematic databases on natural resources are being generated for the entire country.
A database of heritage sites and Site Management Plans drawn up using space technology helps policy planners take informed decisions regarding conservation and preservation and also enables monitoring of activities onsite.
A pilot study has been carried out for the Hampi world heritage site.
Space based technology tools are also being planned for mapping and identifying the vulnerability of each monument and for preparing plans to track and mitigate environmental or weather changes that may have an adverse impact on fragile monuments.
Self-reliance and development of indigenous technology is a key policy of ISRO and its success in this endeavour can be seen in the areas of launch vehicles, satellites, communication, meteorology, space science and establishing of the required ground infrastructure.
Technology is built not so much by individuals but by organizations.
ISRO is one such Indian organisation, which has nurtured, developed and demonstrated world class capabilities.
Dear Teachers,
It is essential for teachers to be comfortable in using ICT themselves first.
With the advancement in communication technology leading to increased flow of information, the teachers need to be guide the students not only to benefit from the freely available information but also not to get overwhelmed by the incessant flow of information.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I take this opportunity to recognise, with deep appreciation, the professional dedication with which you all have played a commendable role in making our nation a confident, vibrant and modern India.
I congratulate all the teachers who are being recognised with awards.
To all of you, I wish success for your future endeavours.
I also convey my best wishes to the entire teaching community in the country and call upon them to stay firm on the path of leading India forward to its next golden age.
Thank You.
Jai Hind.
I am delighted to be here today on the occasion of the Diamond Jubilee celebrations of EEPC India, a premier trade and investment promotion organization of our country.
Set up in 1955 by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, EEPC India has been successfully shouldering its responsibility of nurturing Indian engineering exports for the last 60 years.
It has today become the largest organization of its kind with over 13,000 members out of whom 60% are SMEs.
The share of engineering exports to total merchandise exports rose from 18.14% in fiscal 2004-05 to 22.71% in 2014-15.
The nature of Indian engineering exports has been changing over time as India is fast moving from exporting low-value goods to developing countries to exporting high-value goods to developed countries.
Fresh opportunities such as outsourcing of engineering goods and services, better and improved product design, product differentiation, and maintenance and designing of manufacturing systems are providing new growth avenues in this sector.
In the aftermath of the global recession, our economy has started showing signs of revival.
GDP growth improved from 5.1 percent in 2012-13 to 6.9 percent in 2013-14 and then to 7.3 percent in the last fiscal.
Industrial production, led by the manufacturing sector, also exhibited an upturn in FY 2014-15.
Infrastructure development for India is, thus, both an imperative and a key concern.
The growth prospects for the engineering sector in the light of stepping up of investments in infrastructure and physical capital are, accordingly, immense.
Success of this initiative will facilitate further development and strengthening of the Indian engineering sector as a consequence.
The thrust now will have to be on product quality, market and product diversification.
It is a matter of satisfaction, therefore, that EEPC has taken many initiatives to promote new and emerging sectors such as Defense, Medical Devices and Renewable Energy and is stressing on Skill Development to ensure that the engineering sector is geared up for the future.
Jai Hind!
I also compliment all the eminent and empowered women leaders featured in this book who are pioneers in various fields of activities.
The stories and experiences of their journey towards success will serve as an immense source of inspiration and motivation surely to all women.
But, also I may add here to all persons, both men and women, as they are stories of challenges, conviction, commitment, dedication and indomitable courage without which nobody can achieve success.
This book will also help sensitize men to the problems women are confronted with every day and make them realize that respect for women must inform every decision they make.
The book is about the inner strength of women and how far their determination and faith can take them.
The first steps in this direction, in theory, have already been taken in our Constitution that envisions equality for all.
We need to build such mechanisms within institutions that facilitate the growth of women into decision making positions.
The society which cannot respect women simply cannot be called a civilised society.
Thank you,
JAI HIND!
Excellency,
The close bonds of friendship between India and Seychelles have stood the test of time.
For the past four decades, since the independence of Seychelles, we have worked together to achieve our common goals of development and growth.
We have joined hands to face common challenges, addressed regional and global issues, overcome adversities and celebrated our successes.
The participation of an Indian Navy contingent in your National Day Parade this year was not only an honour to India but also a manifestation of our shared sentiments.
Mr. President, we laud your vision for Seychelles and your efforts to revitalize its growth and development.
The economic reforms undertaken by you, the expansion and diversification of your economy and your simultaneous focus on social welfare have shown splendid results.
Seychelles now stands among the countries recognised by the World Bank as High Income Group Countries.
We welcome your accession to the World Trade Organisation and congratulate you on your being ranked by the UNDP as the country with the 3rdhighest Human Development Index in Africa in the year 2014.
Our Protocol on co-operation in the field of Blue Economy is a major step in the conservation and sustainable use of Indian Ocean resources.
We are glad that our maritime security co-operation has been fruitful.
The operationalisation of the Coastal Surveillance and Radar System will further contribute to securing your maritime territory.
The increased air connectivity between Mahe and Mumbai will promote tourist flows in both directions and help to intensify business contacts and enhance bilateral trade and investment.
India is committed to extending our support and assistance to Seychelles in areas prioritised by your Government.
Excellency, our traditional linkages and cultural affinities are at the core of our strategic convergence at multilateral fora.
We greatly appreciate the support that we have received from you for our candidature for permanent membership of an expanded UN Security Council.
We look forward to working with you for a constructive outcome.
I take this opportunity to reiterate that India remains deeply committed to its partnership with Africa.
This is exemplified by the India-Africa Forum Summits which began in 2008.
India will be hosting the 3rd Summit of the Forum in October this year.
We expect the Summit to result in new ideas for enhancing the socio-economic development of our peoples.
We look forward to your participation in the Summit.
- the health and well-being of His Excellency, President James Alix Michel;
- the continued progress and prosperity of the Republic of Seychelles; and
- the enduring friendship between the people of India and the friendly people of Seychelles.
Excellencies,
I warmly welcome you all to India.
It is indeed a pleasure and a privilege to receive you in the Rashtrapati Bhavan.
Even though India is separated from the Pacific Island Countries by oceans and continents, we are proud to have a long tradition of close friendship with you.
Our peoples are bound by our centuries-old trade and cultural linkages that have contributed to the trust and warmth in our relations.
We particularly appreciate the way that your nations have made the Indian diaspora feel comfortable and secure in distant lands.
Our Government attaches great importance to its relations with our friends in the Pacific Island Countries.
Excellencies,
The establishment of this Forum reflects the desire of all its member countries to build an enduring partnership between our nations and our peoples.
I would like to thank you for the contribution of each of your governments to its success.
Your reunion in New Delhi and Jaipur, less than a year after the first Summit in Fiji last November, is testimony to your commitment to the common objectives of the Forum.
I am happy to note that the programs announced by Prime Minister Narendra Modi at the First FIPIC Summit in Fiji only a few months ago are already bearing fruit.
India is committed to partner with you in your efforts to achieve the developmental goals of your respective nations.
We hope this will support specific projects prioritised by you.
We are glad that the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation programme, the ICCR scholarships, the special training modules organized by Foreign Service Institute and other such schemes are being availed by your citizens.
We believe that such exchanges between our peoples will go a long way in increasing their contacts and mutual understanding.
I am convinced that our bilateral cooperation has much greater potential waiting to be realised.
Excellencies, India, like the Pacific Island Countries, has chains of islands and is also experiencing the negative impact of climate change.
Like you, we are confronted with serious challenges in preserving our fragile ecosystems while stimulating growth.
We believe that the sharing of best practices and eco-friendly technologies among our countries will greatly help us all to collaborate in obtaining finances and technology transfers required to combat the impact of climate change.
We would be happy to work with you in these areas - to help preserve your environment and conserve your precious resources.low carbon and renewable technologies
The Pacific Island Countries are generously endowed with natural resources.
We would be happy to work with you in harnessing your mineral, marine and hydrocarbon resources.
Our Government and private sector are keen to strengthen and diversify our bilateral trade and encourage investments in fisheries, agriculture, oil and natural gas, mining and water desalination.
It would be in the interest of all FIPIC members to identify our complementarities so that we can focus our efforts on those.
Excellencies, we greatly appreciate the support we have received from you for our candidature for permanent membership of an expanded UN Security Council.
This year marks the 70th anniversary of the United Nations.
UNSC reform and expansion will be discussed and concrete proposals are expected to be considered in the forthcoming UNGA session next month.
We believe that it is vital for us to work together to push for these long awaited reforms in the forthcoming session of the UNGA.
I am confident that your deliberations tomorrow and the work of the Forum will result in concrete proposals for our enhanced cooperation in the years ahead.
I look forward to increased exchanges between our Governments and our peoples on regional and global issues of our common concern.
On a personal note, I am delighted that some of you are accompanied by your gracious spouses.
I hope you all enjoy your visit and that the programmes of the Forum bring you to India regularly.
With these few words, Excellencies, I once again welcome you and extend to you my best wishes for the success of the 2ndFIPIC Summit.
Thank you.
Fellow citizens:
I convey my special greetings to members of our armed forces, paramilitary forces and internal security forces.
I also congratulate all our sportspersons who have participated and won laurels in various tournaments in India and abroad.
My congratulations to Shri Kailash Satyarthi, Nobel Peace Prize winner for 2014, who has done the country proud.
Friends:
The birth of modern India was a moment of historic exhilaration; but it was also tinged with the blood of unimaginable suffering along the length and breadth of our country.
The ideals and convictions, that had held through the travails of an epic struggle against British rule, were under strain.
The sagacity and maturity of that generation saved our ideals from deviation or degeneration under the pressure of emotion, including rage.
We abolished archaic customs and laws, and ensured change for women through education and jobs.
Our institutions are the infrastructure of this idealism.
Fellow citizens:
Our institutions of democracy are under stress.
The constitution can provide only the organs of state, such as the legislature, the executive and the judiciary.
The factors on which the working of those organs of the state depends are the people and the political parties they will set up as their instruments to carry out their wishes and their politics.
Who can say how the people of India and their parties will behave?
If the institutions of democracy are under pressure, it is time for serious thinking by the people and their parties.
The correctives must come from within.
Fellow citizens:
Our performance over the last decade has been commendable; and it is most heartening that after a dip, we have recovered to 7.3% growth in 2014-15.
But the benefits of growth must reach the poorest of the poor much before they land in the bank accounts of the richest of the rich.
We are an inclusive democracy, and an inclusive economy; there is place for everyone in the hierarchy of wealth.
But the first call goes to those who suffer on the brink of deprivation.
Fellow citizens:
A generous nature when violated can turn into a destructive force leading to calamities resulting in huge loss of life and property.
Even as I speak, large parts of the nation are barely recovering from floods.
We need immediate relief for the afflicted as well as long-term solutions for the management of both, water deficiency and excess.
Fellow citizens:
Fellow citizens:
Humanity is an ocean; if a few drops of the ocean are dirty, the ocean does not become dirty
Friends:
Peace, friendship and cooperation bind nations and peoples together.
Recognizing the shared destiny of the Indian sub-continent, we must strengthen connectivity, expand institutional capacity and enhance mutual trust to further regional cooperation.
As we make progress in advancing our interests globally, India is also engaged in pro-actively promoting goodwill and prosperity in our immediate neighbourhood.
It is heartening that the long pending land boundary issue with Bangladesh has been finally resolved.
Fellow citizens:
While we offer our hand willingly in friendship, we cannot stay blind to deliberate acts of provocation and a deteriorating security environment.
India is a target of vicious terrorist groups operating from across the borders.
Except the language of violence and the cult of evil, these terrorists have no religion and adhere to no ideology.
Our neighbours must ensure that their territoryis not used by forces inimical to India.
Our policy will remain one of zero tolerance for terrorism.
We reject any attempt to use terrorism as an instrument of state policy.
Infiltration into our territory and attempts to create mayhem will be dealt with a strong hand.
I salute the courage and heroism of our security forces who are maintaining an eternal vigil to safeguard the territorial integrity of our country and the safety of our people.
I also specially commend the brave civilians who boldly detained a hardened terrorist ignoring the risk to their own lives.
Fellow citizens:
She is a myth and an idea, a dream and a vision, and yet very real and present and pervasive
The roots are deep but the leaves are beginning to wilt.
It is time for renewal.
The answer may not be comfortable, but the question has to be asked.
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a rare combination of political philosophy and spiritual discourse bringing high morality to practical situations of daily life.
So also Moily ji has reflected upon virtually all facets of social and political life in India today.
He has then addressed them through the prism of the eternal principles of good governance, high morality and righteousness.
He has, no doubt, drawn from his own variety of experiences as a political leader and administrator.
I laud Moilyji for selecting the effective medium of poetry and the timeless theme of the Ramayana to deliver this important message.
I congratulate him for reminding us, through his powerful verse, that the challenges that our society faces today can be resolved if we follow our ancient value systems.RamayanaMahabharatasamskarastheMahabharatathe Ramayana
His Ram Rajya is a nation where peace, prosperity and tranquillity prevail.
Thus, our democratic rights come with responsibilities.
We, the people of India are duty bound to make collective efforts to build our society, and contribute sincerely to the economic growth and inclusive development of our nation.
I thank them for giving me this honour and wish the Foundation every success in its other similar initiatives.
With these words, I once again congratulate my old friend Dr. Veerappa Moily.
Jai Hind!
Leaders of institutions of higher education; heads of other academic and research institutes; faculty members; dear students:
I welcome all the new students to universities and other centres of higher learning.
Addressing you twice a year through video conferencing is a practice I started in January 2014.
Through this e-platform, which now has been upgraded to twice its capacity, it is possible for me to connect with a much larger audience from Kashmir to Kanyakumari, West to East and North-East.
For that, I must thank the National Knowledge Network and the NIC teams.
My dear students:
My two illustrious predecessors, Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan - a philosopher teacher and Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam - a scientist teacher have greatly influenced my thinking on the education sector.
We are working for a modern democracy built on the values of human dignity and equality.
It is a matter of fact that 26 per cent of our population is illiterate.
Yet, our education system has given rise to the second largest pool of scientists and engineers in the world.
Even today, many villages in the country are devoid of clean drinking water.
Yet, we churn out a larger quantity of software for US IT firms than any other country.
To take this fascinating and vibrant democracy to greater heights, we need highly educated and skilled young men and women.
That is the challenge before our higher education system.
My dear students:
In the contemporary world, we are wading in a sea of information.
Converting this information into knowledge and knowledge into wisdom, calls for exceptional skills which we must impart in our students.
They should be prepared for lifelong learning which now is easier because of digital technology.
An inquisitive mind and research oriented approach has to be built in our students.
But when information is networked, its power and utility increases.
Students must learn how to manage knowledge collectively.
Another skill essential for the younger generation is to learn how to use the latest technologies for aiding their learning process.
Entrepreneurship is another quality which must be cultivated in our students from an early age.
They must learn how to take calculated risks for the sake of greater achievements within the parameters of ethical business practices.
Development of the country and betterment of humanity should be the guiding principles for mission driven leaders of tomorrow.
Friends:
To make learning more effective, teaching pedagogy must be refined, curricula up-dated regularly, an inter-disciplinary approach adopted and evaluation mechanism reformed.
They must identify core competencies and nurture centres of excellence.
MOOCs, which first began in 2008, allow students to hear lectures and read course material on-line, and earn a degree at a cost much lower than conventional education.
I refuse to believe that despite having the second largest higher education system in the world, with over 700 universities and 36,000 colleges, we do not have even one truly outstanding institution.
The rankings process should be taken seriously.
A high rank can boost the morale of the academic community and open greater avenues of growth and placement for students.
It can help attract the best faculty from India and abroad and provide a benchmark for continuous quality enhancement.
Institutions must set up nodal authorities to handle data coordination.
Some of the IITs have developed expertise in dealing with the ratings process.
They can act as knowledge partners to other institutions.
As a result of concerted efforts, India today has nine institutions in top 50 in the BRICS region, with the Indian Institute of Science Bangalore at the 5th position.
I hope the success in the BRICS rating will extend to other international ratings.
Friends:
These challenges must ring the bells in the laboratories, corridors and classrooms of our higher academic institutions.
Unfortunately, research in most institutes is marked by a certain degree of neglect.
The eco-system for cutting-edge research is missing.
This general apathy is reflected in some indicators.
India has 160 researchers in R&D per one million people compared to 710 in Brazil and 1,020 in China.
Friends:
Academic institutes in India must develop partnerships with reputed international institutions.
A win-win mode of interaction could be exchange of faculty; collaborative research; and sharing of academic resources like course material and resource persons.
An increased interaction by setting up industry-interface cells and induction of industry experts in governance structures of our institutes can pave the way for sponsorship of chairs; support for research projects; and setting up of incubation centres and laboratories.
Thank you.
Your Excellency, Mr. Filipe Nyusi,
President of the Republic of Mozambique,
It is my privilege to receive you on your first State Visit to India.
On behalf of our Government and people, I extend a warm welcome to you, Madam Isaura Nyusi and the distinguished members of your delegation.
It is a matter of satisfaction, indeed, that your State Visit is taking place at a time when India and Mozambique are commemorating 40 years of the establishment of our diplomatic relations.
I take this opportunity to also congratulate you and the people of Mozambique as you celebrate the 40thanniversary of your independence.
Mr. President, although our people-to-people ties go down the centuries, our friendship in modern times dates back to the days of your freedom movement.
The people of India were, indeed, pleased to witness the independence of Mozambique in 1975.
India is glad to see that since then, Mozambique has made remarkable progress in reducing poverty, enhancing literacy, providing primary healthcare to its people and significantly increasing its agricultural production.
By ensuring internal peace and stability in the last two decades and taking up wide-ranging reforms, Mozambique has transformed itself into one of the fastest growing economies in Africa.
There is ample scope for building upon the many complementarities between our economies and for expanding our collaboration in several fields including agriculture, food processing, healthcare and in the exploitation of your significant natural resources.
India values its cooperation with Mozambique in international fora, including the United Nations, the Commonwealth and the Indian Ocean Rim Association.
We greatly appreciate your support to our candidature for permanent membership of an expanded UN Security Council.
In this 70th year of the United Nations, we look forward to working together with Mozambique and our partners in the African Union and the Southern African Development Community to pursue these long awaited reforms.
Excellency, I take this opportunity to reiterate that India remains deeply committed to its partnership with Africa.
This is demonstrated by the success of the India Africa Forum Summits which began in 2008.
India will be hosting the 3rd Summit of the Forum in October this year.
We look forward to Mozambique's active participation in the summit.
I have no doubt that the Summit will provide new and creative ideas for enhancing the socio-economic development of our peoples.
Excellency, our success is already a good example of mutually beneficial South-South Cooperation.
I am confident that the new areas of focus identified during your visit will further strengthen our enduring partnership.
With these words, Excellency, I wish you and Madam Isaura Nyusi an enjoyable and fruitful visit to India.
- to the well-being and prosperity of the people of Mozambique; and
- to lasting friendship between India and Mozambique.
Thank you!
I congratulate you all on your journey so far and reaching this important milestone.
I understand this federation was established as the Mysore Chamber of Commerce in 1916 by Sir M. Visvesvaraya.
It is today a premier organization for industry, trade and service sectors in Karnataka.
It has played a catalytic role in policy-making, representing business and industry in government bodies, providing a platform to businessmen for discussion, and interacting and working with the government to resolve problems faced by the industry.
As this august industry body enters its one hundredth year of service, it is heartening to note its contribution to the economic development of Karnataka.
Successive governments in Karnataka have implemented proactive and business friendly policies.
It is one of the most technology savvy states in India, with a tradition of employing technology across various sectors of the economy.
Nearly 60 percent of biotech units in India are also located here.
It has about 1,200 companies in information technology (IT) sector.
Bengaluru is rightly dubbed the Silicon Valley of India.
More than eighty Fortune 500 companies and 700 multi-nationals are based here.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Our GDP grew at 8.6 and 8.9 percent in 2009-10 and 2010-11, respectively.
Fiscal expansionary measures helped in maintaining the growth momentum amidst downturn anxieties emanating from the global markets.
The experience of the developed economies in the past few years suggests that an economy at full employment, but with inflation higher than the normal may be better positioned to withstand a bout of financial stress than one that is flirting with deflation.
In our case we have also seen that business sentiments once broken and depressed may take considerable time to mend and revive the growth momentum.
Growth momentum was impacted, but recovery has been significant and rapid in comparison to trends witnessed elsewhere in the world.
Macro-economic parameters like inflation and external sector balance have improved in the past year.
I urge the industry to take part through its CSR activities and lend a helping hand in taking these initiatives to their logical end.
Friends:
It also requires a better appreciation of the socio-economic realities.
Businesses are meant not only to earn profits for their shareholders but also to add value to the society at large.
Industry leaders would do well to build this gospel of doing business into their corporate work culture.
I wish all of you the very best for the future.
Thank You.
Jai Hind.
It is one of the oldest universities in our country.
I am also happy to have the opportunity to visit Mysore.
With Chamundi Hills as its backdrop, this city is dotted with beautiful palaces and attractive Indo-Saracenic buildings.
The University of Mysore, which is headquartered here, has pioneered higher education in Karnataka.
It is chiefly his patriotism, his enthusiasm and his unflinching advocacy which converted what was once little more than a dream of the future into a living creation and his name will always be remembered above all others, as the man to whom our university owes its being
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This campus was named so by Vice Chancellor Kuvempu who was also a poet laureate.
He emphasized the use of mother tongue as the medium to communicate and inspired innumerable scholars to write textbooks for higher education.Mana-sagan-gothri
Beginning with 11 departments, I am told that it now has 54 post-graduate departments, two post-graduate centres, one satellite centre, four constituent colleges, 49 research centres and 38 outreach centres.
What started as a small rivulet has assumed the proportion of a roaring river today.
I compliment you all and urge you to keep going!
The Vice Chancellors attending the Conference declared their intention to replicate this model.
Eight decades later, this method of knowledge propagation is still relevant in our country.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
To unleash the potential of her energetic youth, a world-class educational system is necessary.
Many bright scholars go abroad for higher studies for want of good quality institutions in our country.
Even the private sector has started contributing significantly to this expansion in higher education.
However, if an objective analysis of the state of higher education in our country is undertaken today, it is easy to suggest that there are only a handful of higher education institutions possessing the quality to produce graduates for the global market.
Indian institutions are absent from the top 200 positions in world university rankings published by reputed agencies.
Friends:
Availability of good faculty is one.
Teaching must be made more attractive as a career option for bright students.
To inject new thinking and diversity in pedagogy, faculty must also be hired from abroad.
Faculty development through exchange programmes, participation in seminars and workshops, and joint research and project work with academic and industry partners is another area we need to lay emphasis on.
Good governance must play a central role in the growth of an institution.
They must deploy technology to efficiently disseminate academic material to greater number of students, engage resource persons through e-platforms, and establish linkages with research and other academic institutions.
Collaborative partnerships must be aimed at pursuing frontier research and creating synergy in the development of new concepts for furthering human wellbeing.
Friends:
This must be reversed.
Our country grapples with many socio-economic problems and answers to many of them have eluded us so far.
We must identify areas that call for innovative solutions and facilitate our universities and institutions to undertake research programmes.
We must adopt a multi-disciplinary approach as most research activity requires the meeting of minds from multiple domains.
A way forward could be to give wings to the ingenuous ideas of students and grassroots innovators.
The initiative of setting up Innovation Clubs taken up in several Central Universities could be replicated by others.
It will act as a platform where novel ideas are nurtured and innovators mentored to develop new products.
I urge you to spearhead an innovation movement in this region.
Accept my best wishes for a successful conduct of your year-long centenary festivities, which I am happy to note, includes a theme song, play, documentary and a film about your history.
Best of luck for the future!
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
It is one of the important centres of learning in the higher education landscape of our country.
I congratulate all of you for the progress made so far in terms of its remarkable growth and enhanced prestige.
University is at the top of the formal education pyramid.
It is, therefore, incumbent on universities to guide the direction of progress of the society.
Ancient India had a tradition of world-class learning, represented by renowned universities at Nalanda, Takshashila, Vikramashila, Valabhi, Odantapuri and Somapura.
These seats of learning dominated the world education system in higher education for eighteen hundred years beginning sixth century BC.
This system started declining from twelfth century AD.
Unfortunately, Indian higher education is yet to regain that frontline position.
According to rankings by reputed agencies, no Indian institution feature in the list of top 200 universities in the world.
I have been making this remark before higher academic institutions almost as a ritual now.
My sole purpose is to impress upon the universities to adopt a more methodical approach to the ratings process and also effect holistic changes for better academic management.
A higher ranking boosts the morale of students and teachers by increasing their growth opportunities.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
How do we transform our universities into great learning centres?
At first, there is need to link education with research and innovation in a seamless manner.
Education disseminates knowledge while research creates new knowledge.
Innovation converts that knowledge into wealth and social good.
Promoting inter-disciplinary research and research at under-graduate level, boosting collaborative research and joint research papers, and encouraging bright students to enter the research field are some of the steps required in this direction.
Emphasis is being laid on research at the Vidyapeeth right from the beginning.
I am glad to know that PhD programme in all specialties was started in 2009 and that 22 PhD degrees have been awarded today.
Particular focus is called for nurturing innovative ideas.
The ingenuity of the grassroots innovators require mentoring for development of viable products useful to the common man.
Innovation clubs have been set up in several central institutions to act as a bridge between the academic community and innovators.
I wish to see such platform being built in our private institutions as well.
Friends:
Changes needed in academic institutions are multi-dimensional.
Adequate availability of good quality faculty must be ensured.
Faculty must use latest pedagogy relying on ICT solutions for effective delivery of instructions.
Faculty also must upgrade their knowledge of a subject through participation in refresher courses and seminars.
Institutions must create synergy with other institutions for research partnerships, and sharing of course material and subject experts.
Institutions must also establish networks with the industry for guidance on projects, course design and internship programmes.
Our universities are the torchbearers of socio-economic development.
The relevance of its teaching must extend beyond the classrooms, to the society and the nation.
At the same time, they must through their own example usher in socio-economic change.
The Government initiatives aimed at faster economic development, namely Swachh Bharat, Adarsh Gram, Digital India and Make-in-India, have the potential to lift India to the state of an advanced nation.
Their successful implementation calls for participation by a wide section of the society.
Our education, training, research and innovation must contribute to these national objectives.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Our education model must not only develop the mind but also create positive mind-sets.
A creative mind-set combined with a positive attitude can help unearth solutions to problems afflicting the society like malnutrition, affordable healthcare, efficient energy use, drinking water and sanitation.
At the micro level, it must result in character-building in students.
With these words, I conclude.
I once again compliment all the students for their success.
I also wish the Vidyapeeth the very best for the future.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Your Excellency, Dr. Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete,
President of the United Republic of Tanzania,
Madam Salma Kikwete,
Distinguished Guests,
It is a great pleasure and privilege for me to receive you today, Mr. President, on your first State Visit to India.
On behalf of the Government and the people of India, I extend a warm welcome to you and Madam Salma Kikwete - and the distinguished members of your delegation.
Your Excellency, the people of India know Tanzania as a land of magnificent lakes, rich wildlife reserves and the mighty, snow-capped Kilimanjaro.
We appreciate Tanzania as a nation of gracious and hard working people, living in peace and harmony.
In particular, we remember him for his contribution to South-South Co-operation.
Under your leadership, Excellency, Tanzania has made commendable progress.
We applaud your success in reducing poverty and hunger in Tanzania.
We welcome your successful efforts for achieving peace in your region.
As two vibrant nations with age-old ties and many common interests, our joint efforts are an inspiring example of South-South Co-operation.
India and Tanzania have a shared commitment to international peace and stability.
We both desire to see that the fruits of globalisation are enjoyed more equitably.
Excellency, I take this opportunity to reiterate that India is deeply committed to its partnership with Africa.
We consider the people of Africa as brothers on journey to a common destination.
I recall your previous visit to India in 2008 as Co-chairman of the 1st India-Africa Forum Summit.
India will have the privilege of hosting the 3rd India-Africa Forum Summit in New Delhi in October this year.
I am confident that the Summit will result in new initiatives and innovative ideas for the development, growth and advancement of all our peoples.
With these words, Excellency, I once again welcome you and Madam Salma Kikwete and wish you a very fruitful visit to India.
Distinguished guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Thank you.
Your Excellency, Mr Alexander Lukashenko, President of the Republic of Belarus,
Distinguished business representatives,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Trade, investment and economic cooperation form one of the most important facets of contemporary India-Belarus relations.
As we seek to elevate our bilateral relationship, it is our business communities that possess the maximum potential to transform and energize these ties.
I am delighted that a large business delegation from India is here today.
They represent an array of sectors such as Energy, Consulting Services, Healthcare, Chemicals, Fertilizers, Information Technology, Infrastructure, Utilities & Renewable Energy, Manufacturing and Pharmaceuticals.
I am happy to see that they are joined by many counterparts representing business and industry in Belarus.
Friends,
India and Belarus have a long history of friendship and multi-faceted cooperation for mutual benefit.
Our political dialogue is regular and substantive.
One of the significant aspects of our relationship has been the excellent understanding between our countries on international issues and support for each other in multilateral fora such as the United Nations.
We have set up excellent institutional mechanisms to promote economic and trade linkages, defence cooperation as well as scientific and technological research.
We have signed the necessary enabling Agreements and MOUs in a wide range of areas of shared interest and a few more have been signed during my visit.
Our cultural relations and the interactions between our peoples are strong.
There is wide popular support in both our countries for enhancing our relations.
As you are aware, India is emerging as one of the largest economies in the world and one of the fastest growing emerging markets with an average annual growth rate of more than 7 per cent over the past decade.
There is also a renewed focus on implementation of projects, especially in infrastructure.
Our talks have convinced me that we share the same enthusiasm and desire to expand our bilateral relations.
With a view to further energizing bilateral co-operation, we have issued a very substantive and focussed Roadmap on the India-Belarus partnership.
I am sure you would have noticed that the Roadmap focuses extensively on economic, trade, investment and technology partnerships.
Ladies and gentlemen,
trade turnover is modest and way below its real potential.
I am confident that this level is achievable if we expand the range of items in our trade basket, increase the share of high-technology and value-added products and enhance exchanges and cooperation in the services sector, such as healthcare, IT, financial services, transport and logistics.
To facilitate trade, both governments are keen to intensify cooperation in quality control, quarantine, certification of goods and standardization as well as simplification of customs formalities.
We will work together, bilaterally and in the context of the proposed partnership between India and the Eurasian Economic Union, to address any existing trade barriers and to avoid introduction of new barriers to trade.
This will be a significant step towards enhancing our bilateral trade and also in promoting greater integration of Belarus in international trade structures.
I would like to call upon companies from India and Belarus to increase their engagement in trade fairs as well as national, international and regional exhibitions held in both countries respectively.
Friends,
These include conventional and small-scale power generation, new and renewable energy, metallurgy and mining, defence, automotive and agricultural engineering, pharmaceuticals, textiles, agriculture and food processing.
All these sectors offer promising opportunities for investment.
Of course, this is not an exhaustive list but an indicative one, where there are immediate and promising prospects for synergy.
I am also happy to inform you that India would be extending a new line of credit of US$ 100 million to Belarus to encourage joint projects in mutually identified sectors.
Joint ventures between India and Belarus can become even more attractive in the framework of the larger market of the Eurasian Economic Union.
To create the necessary enablers for greater trade and investment flows, we are seeking to enhance cooperation in the financial sector and to make available necessary financial instruments for funding of bilateral projects, financing trade and joint projects and providing export support and insurance.
As both Belarus and India are nations with a tradition of scientific and technological research, our bilateral partnership in these areas can benefit tremendously if the forces of innovation and entrepreneurship could combine with our existing strengths in research.
I, therefore, urge the companies and businesses present here to explore avenues for technical cooperation in areas such as new and renewable energy, space, the chemical industry, automotive industry including special vehicles, IT, telecommunications, transport, construction and industrial infrastructure.
Both Governments need to also take measures, as may be necessary, for encouraging and inducing implementation of innovative projects, particularly in high-tech areas such as optical, laser, nano and bio-technologies, electronics and microelectronics and mechanical engineering.
I also call upon Belarusian companies to explore investment and scientific opportunities available in the many industrial and technology parks in India, as a means of enhancing their participation in the Indian economy.
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am delighted to be in Belarus.
I am particularly honoured to be the first Head of State from India to visit this beautiful country.
Since I arrived, I have had the privilege to interact with the leading personalities of Belarus in politics, academia, science and technology, industry, culture and sports.
I have had very good discussions earlier today with His Excellency the President of Belarus.
Excellency, distinguished guests,
India attaches great value to our friendship and co-operation with Belarus.
Our common interests in the field of science and technology, our complementarities in the fields of information technology and engineering, our collaboration in energy and in pharmaceuticals - as well as our close cooperation in defence, have linked our countries in a long standing, fruitful partnership for mutual benefit.
As you are aware, India is an old civilization with a young population.
We hope to see substantial involvement by all our partners and friends in India and abroad to translate these goals into reality.
Belarus has competencies in many of these areas, especially in construction machinery, urban development, vocational training and niche areas of manufacturing and technology.
Another key objective of my visit is to foster mutually beneficial linkages between premier academic and scientific institutions in India and Belarus.
I am glad to see that the Indian Digital Learning Centre in Minsk has been successfully operating since January 2012 - and has imparted advanced IT training to a large number of IT professionals from Belarus.
Belarus is popular with Indian students.
We must encourage linkages in the education sector as an investment in capacity-building for future generations.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I am indeed heartened to note the deep and widespread appreciation of Indian culture and traditions in Belarus.
Many in Belarus have trained in classical Indian dance and music.
Last but not the least, Indian sportspersons could benefit from deeper cooperation in the area of sports between India and Belarus.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
We certainly have much to look forward to in our bilateral partnership.
The small Indian community in Belarus, including our students, has been made to feel comfortable, welcome and secure here.
At the same time, I am confident you will play an invaluable role in strengthening the bonds of friendship between India and Belarus.
Thank you!
Your Excellency Mr. Alexander V Lukashenko, President of the Republic of Belarus,
Distinguished members of the Belarusian and Indian delegations,
Distinguished Ladies and gentlemen,
I am indeed delighted to be in Minsk on this first State Visit from India to Belarus.
I thank you, Excellency, for your kind words of welcome and the gracious hospitality accorded to me and to my delegation.
We have thoroughly enjoyed our visit to your beautiful, green and welcoming land.
It is indeed a delight to experience the simplicity, warmth and affection of the people of Belarus.
India and Belarus relations have a history of friendly and mutually enriching interactions.
He had very intense and fruitful discussions with leading intellectuals of your country on international and topical issues of the day.
India and Belarus are the inheritors of this glorious philosophical and intellectual tradition.
Since your emergence as an independent nation in 1991, India and Belarus have successfully developed our relationship based on friendship and mutual benefit.
Our ties today cut across practically all sectors, ranging from trade and economic cooperation, defence, science and technology and cultural and people to people exchanges.
We also share common approaches to international issues.
Our cooperation in the United Nations and other multilateral fora, including in the Non-Aligned Movement has been close and fruitful.
This should continue.
Mr. President,
We have had the pleasure of receiving you twice in India as the President of Belarus, in 1997 and in 2007.
Your successful visits have contributed enormously in elevating our relations to a higher trajectory and in enhancing the quality of our dialogue.
I am confident that our discussions today, and the various events being held in conjunction with my visit, would take India-Belarus relations to even greater heights.
Let me reiterate that India remains fully committed to a deeper and more diversified relationship with Belarus.
Dag Hammarskjöld was aware that the first step towards finding peace outside is to find it within.
He knew that meditation and quiet are important conditions for this quest.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Political and economic agreements will not on their own build a lasting peace.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Rabindranath Tagore was a renaissance man and such men are found rarely in history.
In their personality, they capture not just the times they live in but also many complex questions that transcend geography and are pertinent for all countries and communities across the world.
Tagore was a versatile genius.
He was not just a poet and author, but also a composer, painter, philosopher and educationist.
He was the perfect ambassador of our country at a time when little was known about India in the outside world.
Throughout his life, he was fascinated by the idea of interaction between civilizations through the exchange of knowledge about their cultures and literatures which reflect the universal values of humanity.
In a world fettered by race, creed and colour, Rabindranath Tagore promoted internationalism for a new world order based on diversity, open-mindedness, tolerance and co-existence.
He travelled far and wide preaching the religion of truth and harmony, and of love and compassion.
He firmly believed that world peace could never be achieved until big and powerful nations curbed their desire for territorial expansion and control over smaller nations.
In his view, war was a consequence of aggressive western materialism that developed in the early part of the 20th century, with science divorced from spirituality.
If Tagore was the intellectual and spiritual torch bearer of global peace, it was theMahatmaor the Great Soul who showed the world thatSatyagraha or Truth Force andAhimsaor Non-Violence can be marshalled to create a more just world.
Mahatma Gandhi commenced his experiments with the use of truth against violence in South Africa and then developed it to create in India a peace movement of a kind the world had never before seen.
This movement not only resulted in the independence of India but also heralded the end of colonialism worldwide.
But I refuse to be blown off my feet by any.
But I refuse to be blown off my feet by any.
Gandhiji, like Tagore, had an abiding concern with Nature and the unique placement of human consciousness in an intricate, intimate and harmonious relationship with nature.
Another important message Gandhiji gave was that economics is of no use without ethics.
This simple injunction creates a moral frame within which human ingenuity has to function.
The limits to human greed have to be defined by inner imperatives and not external constraints.
By placing ethics at the heart of economics, Gandhiji gave us an idea whose significance is timeless.
This is the idea of Trusteeship based on faith which is a unique human capacity.
All of us live by and through trust.
Gandhiji asked us to be Trustees and to have faith in the goodness of our hearts and the hearts of others.
This goodness would enable us to act as Trustees of what are both ours and not ours.
Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore and Gandhiji both recognised that the use ofAhimsawill eventually free the unjust and the oppressor from the need and desire to perpetuate injustice and suffering to others.AhimsaAhimsaAhimsaAhimsa
It happens rarely in history that two seers, two persons who are capable of addressing not only their times but generations to come, work in close dialogue.
The simultaneous presence of Poet Tagore and Mahatma Gandhi is a unique blessing that modern India received and we believe that this good fortune places upon us a special responsibility to involve ourselves actively in the promotion of dialogue amongst different religions, faiths, cultures and civilizations.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
We are clear that lasting peace can be built only on a foundation of mutual respect which was consistently and eloquently advocated by both Tagore and Gandhiji.
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
Your Royal Highnesses,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I thank Your Majesty for your gracious words.
It is indeed a privilege to make this first ever State Visit by a President of India to Sweden.
I deeply appreciate the splendid welcome and the gracious hospitality accorded to me and to my delegation.
Your Majesty, India attaches great importance to its long standing friendship with Sweden.
Though our two nations are geographically distant from each other, we are bound by our common commitment to democratic values and practice.
We are both open, pluralistic societies that are committed to the protection of human rights and the Rule of Law.
We have, over the years, developed mutual trust and goodwill that has brought our people together to achieve our common goals in many sectors.
Our bilateral relations have never been better and our people share a desire to see the enhancement of our co-operation to its full potential.
Your Majesty, our countries have similar views on many issues of regional and global concern.
It has been a decade since then - and over these years, I am happy to say, India has seen dramatic progress in many sectors.
He was not only the first Indian, but in fact, the first non-European to be a Nobel Laureate in literature.
These were probably the first recorded visits of an eminent Indian dignitary to Sweden.
I am honoured to continue the tradition and would like to invite Your Majesties to visit India again - at a time of your convenience.
-- To the continued progress and prosperity of the people of Sweden and India
-- To the enduring friendly relations between India and Sweden.
Thank you.
Substantial investment in terms of money and effort go into making policies, schemes and programmes aimed at eradication of poverty and other socio-economic ills.
Yet, in the absence or poor presence of an effective communication strategy, a large segment of the intended beneficiary population remains unaware of the various benefits they are entitled to.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Relatively weak countries have experienced revolutionary changes and become emerging economies in a matter of one or two generations; all due to the effect of greater technological application.
Technology-led economic growth makes transformational changes possible.
But, to my mind, it is much more than mere application of science.
Technology is contextual.
There is an economic value to technology.
In the past two decades, we are witness to the radical change brought about by mobile telephony and internet.
India too experienced a socio-economic upheaval brought about by these two path-breaking innovations.
India, with 960 million mobile phones today, stands second in the world behind China.
However, the penetration of internet use as a percentage of the population is only twenty, indicating not only a huge gap but a significant potential for future growth as well.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The leveraging capacity for Information and Communication Technology to boost competitiveness and well-being stands as an important indicator of how effectively we are able to deploy technology for people and society.
According to the Global Information Technology Report 2015 released by the World Economic Forum, India is at the 89th position in Network Readiness Index.
Countries like Singapore, Finland and Sweden are leaders in this Index.
We have some distance to cover in order to ensure that infrastructure for Internet and ICT-enabled services is available all over the country and used widely in a systematic manner.
One of the key steps in this endeavour could be to roll out Wi-Fi services in public places across the country, both in urban and rural India.
I hope this will be a crucial step in breaking the hierarchy in access to information of public databases and services.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
It is indeed a privilege for me to be present amidst you to attend the Special Session of the Uttarakhand Legislative Assembly in this beautiful capital city of Dehradun.
I thank Shri Govind Kunjawal, Honourable Speaker, Uttarakhand Legislative Assembly for his kind invitation to be amidst you today.
Nestled in the foothills of the Himalayas, it is home to snow capped mountains and glaciers as well as the holiest of rivers, the Ganga and Yamuna.
Recently, tragedy struck Nepal in the form of a series of earthquakes leading to large scale devastation and loss of human lives.
I take this occasion to extend my deepest condolences to the families of our brothers and sisters in Nepal who have lost their lives in this tragedy.
The Government of India is extending all possible help and support and we have assured the Government and people of Nepal that we are with them in their hour of need.
Honourable Members,
The mountains of Uttarakhand are believed to be the chosen residence of the Gods.
It is said the great Rishi Ved Vyasa wrote the Mahabharata here and Guru Dronacharya had his ashram near Dehradun.
The Pandavas are believed to have stopped by Uttarakhand on their final journey.
Jagat Guru Adi Shankaracharaya visited Kedar Nath in 8th Century and according to some, attained nirvana here.
The famous Advait Ashram established by Swami Vivekananda is situated at Mayawati in Champawat district of the State.
Some of the most sacred places of India are located in Uttarakhand.
The Chardham Yatra encompassing Yamunotri, Gangotri, Kedarnath and Badrinath occupies a cherished place in the heart of most Indians.
Haridwar draws people from all over the world who come to take a holy dip at Har ki Pauri.
The state is also home to Shri Hemkunt Sahib and Piran Kaliyar which are visited by people in large numbers from India and abroad.
One of the routes for the famous Kailash Mansarovar Yatra also passes through Uttarakhand.
It is reassuring to know that the Char Dham Yatra has begun on time this year and is attracting people in large numbers.
I am also happy that the Assembly has been united in its deliberations on how to face extraordinary situations like natural disasters.
Honourable Members,
Born in the year 2000, Uttarakhand has made significant progress since it became the 27th State of the Indian Union.
Uttarakhand has been a leader in efforts for sustainable development.
It was the first Park of its kind, not only in the country, but in the whole of Asia.
It subsequently gained momentum under the leadership of Shri Sunderlal Bahuguna and other environmentalists.
The message of the popular Chipko Song -
99 per cent of the villages have been electrified in the State.
However, this growth has not been uniform and I believe hill areas lag behind.
I am happy to know that the State intends to make Gairsain in Chamoli district the summer capital of the State and construction of a new Vidhan Sabha Bhavan has started.
I also appreciate the green initiatives and process automation undertaken by this Assembly to move towards a paperless Legislature.
I congratulate the people of Uttarakhand who have participated actively in the democratic process overcoming physical and geographical barriers such as hilly and forest terrain.
The hallmark of a vibrant democracy is that the ballot forms the basis of transition of power.
Honourable Members of the Legislative Assembly,
The founding fathers of our Republic were convinced that the Parliamentary system was best suited to our ethos and genius.
Dr. Ambedkar, the Chairman of the Constitution Drafting Committee said: (and I quote)
It is done by the Electorate.
In England, where the Parliamentary system prevails, the assessment of responsibility of the Executive is both daily and periodic.
The daily assessment of responsibility, which is not available under the American system, is, it is felt, far more effective than the periodic assessment and far more necessary in a country like India.
Our Parliamentary democracy today evokes awe and admiration across the world.
Honourable Members of the Assembly,
The Constitution of India places the Legislative Assembly at the centre of governance in a State and conceives of it as the primary instrument of good governance and socio-economic transformation.
The job of a legislator is a 24x7 responsibility.
Legislators must at all times be committed to addressing the problems of the people.
They must give voice to the grievances of the public by raising them on the floor of the Legislature and act as the link between people and the Government.
They must always keep in mind that young and aspirational Indians expect them to be service providers.
They will demand an account of how they have performed at the end of five years.
Every one of us who are in an elected office must remember that the people are our masters.
Each one of us is here because we solicited votes and received their endorsement.
The cardinal principle of effective functioning of the Parliamentary system is that majority will rule and minority will oppose, expose and if possible, depose.
However, minority must accept the decisions of the majority while the majority must respect the views of the minority.
In the Assembly, discipline and decorum must be always maintained and rules, conventions and etiquette observed.
Parliamentary practices, procedures and conventions are meant to provide for orderly and expeditious transaction of business of the House.
Dissent should be expressed with decency and within the contours and parameters of Parliamentary devices.
It is unfortunate that time devoted by legislators towards legislation has been gradually declining across the country.
The Presiding Officers Conferences have time and again reiterated the need for holding a minimum of 100 days of sittings every year.
With the heightened complexity of administration, legislation must be preceded by adequate discussion and scrutiny.
If not, it will fail to deliver the desired results or meet its objectives.
In particular, there is need for utmost caution in matters of legislation, money and finance.
It must be kept in mind that no expenditure can be incurred by the Executive, no tax levied and no money withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of the State without the approval of the Legislature.
It is a matter of satisfaction that the current Sixteenth Lok Sabha has assumed its role and responsibilities in right earnest.
Thankfully, this is less than in many previous sessions.
Let me add that a noteworthy feature of this Lok Sabha is that there are 318 first timers and the time spent on quality debate and discussion has gone up considerably.
I am particularly happy the Constitution Amendment Bill relating to Land Boundary Agreement between India and Bangladesh was passed unanimously by both Houses of Parliament.
The unanimous vote on the Bill has conveyed a strong message of friendship to Bangladesh and established to the world that India stands united on matters of great national importance.
I urge the Uttarakhand Assembly as well as other Assemblies to consider increasing the number of sittings so that issues of the state can be thoroughly discussed and debated.
In order to bring people closer to the Legislatures, I suggest that our Legislative Assemblies establish museums for the public on legislative practices.
They could also invite students to witness sessions and organize capacity building programmes for members of local bodies such as Gram Sabhas and Panchayats.
Honourable Members,
Every legislator should ensure that the content and quality of debates that take place in the chambers are of the highest order.
As members of different political Parties, individual Legislators would be guided by the policies of their respective Parties.
However, issues of development and public welfare transcend political barriers.
It should not be difficult to forge consensus on such issues.
In a parliamentary democracy, the oversight function of the Legislature is important and dynamic.
Legislative oversight is a continuous process carried out in the Committees as well as the floor of the House.
Legislators involvement in Committees such as Public Accounts Committee, Estimates Committee and the Departmental Standing Committees can help them develop expertise in the complex working of government departments.
The Question Hour provides a good opportunity to ask searching questions and hold the Executive accountable for its actions or inaction and to obtain assurances from the Ministries concerned.
This is one of the important privileges of legislators and they must ensure that the Question Hour is fully utilized.
Let me narrate an anecdote to reinforce this point.
Shri S. Satyamurti, a lawyer and outstanding orator, entered the Madras Legislative Council in 1923 and his fame as a legislator rapidly spread all over the country.
Honourable Members,
So let us decide and mete out justice
Modern day legislators would do well to heed this sage advice of the tribal elders.
Honourable Members,
The Uttarakhand Legislative Assembly has over the years promoted the welfare of the people of the State through numerous progressive enactments.
The time has now come to show leadership in catapulting the state to new heights.
Uttarakhand has all the resources required to develop as a major destination for tourism and an important centre for horticulture.
Uttarakhand has been a traditional seat of learning.
The Indian Military Academy, Forest Research Institute, Lal Bahadur Shastri National Administration Academy, Wildlife Institute of India, Indian Institute of Petroleum and Govind Vallabh Pant Agriculture University are already located here.
There is great scope for the state to emerge as an education, sports and IT hub of the country.
Education is the mantra that can transform our nation.
I call upon each one of you to personally supervise the state of schools and colleges in your constituencies and ensure that students go to school, teachers teach and the best of education is provided.
All of you are aware of the Namami Gange programme and Swachh Bharat Abhiyan.
This state which is home to the holy rivers, a major destination for pilgrims and important centre of education must ensure the success of these programmes.
Take upon yourself the goal of a Clean Ganga and Clean India!
Honourable Members,
The Gods have blessed your state and people with a wealth of beauty.
I am confident your hard work, strong determination and conviction will result in happy and prosperous life for each and every citizen of the state.
Thank you.
You are serving, with professionalism and courage, your fellow citizens in all regions of our country.
It is your efforts that are vital in bringing healthcare and health services to our diverse regions.
Your commitment and patience is at the forefront of polio eradication, mid-wife services and even educating communities as you work for their optimal health and improved quality of life.
Her foundational efforts were the inspiration and basis for the development of professional nursing and modern healthcare.
In this context, the input and partnership of nurses, the world over, is essential for the success of Governments and non-Governmental organisations in achieving their objectives of effective care and cost efficient solutions in the field of health.
It is well known that nurses are the largest workforce in the healthcare industry in India.
If they are properly trained and strategically positioned, they can help develop quality health care, strengthen healthcare systems and work effectively in interdisciplinary teams.
They have an important contribution to make in planning and decision-making for the development of an appropriate and effective health policy for India, improving efficiency in public health programmes and reducing cost and wastage.
As first line health-care providers, they are active in all parts of India.
During the same period, the total number of nursing personnel in these two categories registered with the Indian Nursing Council increased from 13.89 lakhs to 25.52 lakhs.
To provide subsidized education in this area, Government has started schools for training in Auxiliary as well as General Nursing and Midwifery in 269 locations across the country.
We need to continue to maintain this momentum to ensure that the requirement of nursing personnel in our country is adequately catered for.
For the improved implementation of these initiatives, new technologies are being made available and applied for monitoring their progress.
I am confident that the new measures that have been taken will go a long way in achieving the desired results.
As a key constituent of the workforce of our country, they are an invaluable asset.
While serving in challenging conditions abroad, they have brought credit to our nation and contributed significantly through their remittances.
Through their disciplined attitude and high level of proficiency, they have earned tremendous goodwill in all parts of the world.
May they grow from strength to strength as they serve their country and people.
The nation is grateful for their gift of service and compassion.
In the present-day knowledge societies, where innovation is at the core of growth, progress and prosperity, educational and research institutions play a critical role.
Each of your institutions is a key participant in the national development of India and Russia.
Our educational and research institutions are making vigorous efforts to rise to these ambitious national goals and the aspirations of our people.
This includes a significant expansion in the reach of quality education, up-scaling our research capacities, and linking more closely research output to industrial needs.
Its quality determines the academic calibre of an educational institution.
Indeed, without strong research programmes, no institution of higher education can truly accomplish its central mandate of promoting learning and knowledge.
It is, thus, imperative that all educational institutions place research at the core of their future plans and activities.
Friends:
In recent years, India and Russia have launched new cooperation programmes in areas such as basic sciences and health research.
I am glad that our Department of Science & Technology and Russian Science Foundation have finalized a cooperation agreement which will offer another platform for supporting joint research projects.
Though the numbers have dropped somewhat in recent years, even now, over four thousand Indian students study at Russian universities.
At the last Summit meeting between India and Russia in December 2014, the two countries had decided to support a network of partnerships between our universities.
I am glad that over recent months, many of you have been involved with your counterparts in identifying opportunities for cooperation and are ready to formalize arrangements for systematic cooperation in the future.
I extend my best wishes for fruitful cooperation in the Network.
At the outset, I extend my heartfelt gratitude to the Academy for honouring me by conferring an Honorary Doctorate.
A matter of pride as it is for me, I see this as a manifestation of the enduring affection that the Russian people have for India.
At the same time, it also reflects the depth and resilience of the relationship between our two countries, which I have experienced personally in my many decades of public life.
Since then, it has made a stellar contribution to Russian diplomacy in its role as the principal training institute for serving and aspiring Russian diplomats.
This prestigious institution represents the finest ideals of humanity by training practitioners in the art of negotiations and preparing them to find diplomatic solutions to the challenges of peace and development.
Active interactions with similar institutions in other countries have made this Academy an agent of diplomacy itself.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The crucial role played by Russia and the sacrifices made by the Russian people during that historic period are well-known and widely recognized.
I would like to convey warm felicitations to the Russian people on this historic occasion.
Indians too made significant sacrifices during the War.
In fact, our nations are united by our suffering and sacrifices in the fight against the forces of Fascism and Nazism.
It is, thus, entirely appropriate that we today cherish and celebrate our shared victory.
Friends:
Even then, numerous threads have linked our peoples and civilizations over the centuries.
Afanasy Nikitin journeyed from Tver, near Moscow, to India in 1469 almost three decades before the Portuguese Vasco da Gama reached Kozhikode.
They were extremely well regarded by the Tsar in Moscow, to whom they supplied fine textiles.
It is said that the Indian traders introduced a textile industry in the Russian capital in the middle of the seventeenth century.
The Indologist, Gerasim Lebedev, was a pioneer of Bengali theatre in Calcutta in the late eighteenth century.
Leo Tolstoy was fascinated by Hindu and Buddhist scriptures.
He was familiar with the thinking of Sri Ramakrishna and was impressed by the ideals of Swami Vivekananda.
On the other hand, Mahatma Gandhi was deeply influenced by Tolstoy's thoughts about non-violent resistance and the renunciation of force as a means of opposition.
The artist and philosopher, Nicholas Roerich, came to India in 1923.
Tagore predicted that Russia would be victorious against the fascists, foreseeing the heroism of the Russian people.Gitanjali
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Since then, India and Russia have built a durable and multi-faceted partnership.
It is no exaggeration to state that our unique and multi-dimensional ties have proved their resilience.
India values her close and extensive cooperation with Russia in defence, nuclear energy and security.
We have an extensive inter-governmental scientific collaboration programme.
Joint centres of excellence have been set up to promote research in areas as diverse as powder metallurgy, vaccine development, super-computing, bio-technology, bio-medicine, gas hydrate studies, and earthquake research, to name a few.
We are also looking at intensifying cooperation in innovation-driven projects in high technology areas.
We must build on synergies in areas such as engineering, pharmaceuticals, chemicals, fertilizers, coal, diamonds, metallurgy, civil aircraft, automobiles, and information and communication technology.
Concerted and joint efforts will be needed to overcome structural and other impediments to India-Russia trade and economic collaboration.
Indian businesses need to reach out to Russia's regions and be more responsive to business opportunities in Russia.
Russian companies need to do the same.
We need to comprehend each other's achievements and capabilities, and recognize the huge opportunities for investment and technological tie-ups in our dynamic markets.
We appreciate the warmth and openness with which Indian culture, philosophy and cinema are received in Russia.
The exchanges between our Universities, institutes of higher learning, scholars, artists and intellectuals are of the highest significance and must be encouraged.
A Festival of Russian Culture was celebrated in India last year.
Tourism between India and Russia has grown significantly in recent years and can develop further.
Dear members of the Academy:
Terrorism and extremism emanating from our shared neighbourhood remains a major security threat for India and Russia.
Dealing with this challenge requires not only a strong commitment by our two countries but also cooperation among the international community.
Though the world has become increasingly multi-polar and emerging economies have grown in strength, this is not fully reflected in international institutions and decision-making processes.
We applaud Russia's efforts to promote a political settlement in Syria and its contribution towards a peaceful resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue.
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen:
Russia has been a pillar of strength at difficult moments in India's history.
India will always reciprocate this support.
Across Indian society and the spectrum of its political structures, there is unanimity that friendship with Russia is an important pillar of India's foreign policy.
His personal commitment has led us to new heights in our relations.
We recognize President Putin as a great friend of India.
I look forward to renewing my association with him on this visit.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I also wish to thank you for this unique opportunity to share my thoughts with you.
I would like to begin by reciprocating his warm sentiments and conveying my thanks for the high honour that has been bestowed upon me today.
I am deeply touched by this gesture.
I take it as a reflection of the warmth of the people of Belarus towards my country and for me.
It is, therefore, with profound appreciation and humility that I accept the Professor Honoris Causa conferred on me by the Belarus StateUniversity in my capacity as the President of India on behalf of the people of India.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am aware that the Belarus State University has contributed significantly to the richly deserved reputation of Belarus as a country of academic excellence in a wide range of academic streams - including science, technology and engineering as well as medicine and human sciences.
The intellectual caliber of the University and its alumni is reflected in the fact that it contributes as many as three out of every four researchers to the Belarus Academy of Sciences.
Ladies and Gentlemen: I am in Belarus on the first ever State Visit by an Indian President.
Relations between India and Belarus have developed quite rapidly over the past two decades.
Our relationship now spans several sectors ranging from trade and economic cooperation, science, technology, education as well as defence cooperation.
We recall the successful visits to Indiaby His Excellency the President of Belarus in 1997 and 2007, which gave a fillip to our ties.
There are positive signals that suggest that we could be moving to an even higher growth path.
I have had excellent discussions with President Lukashenko earlier today.
Our talks have convinced me that we share the same enthusiasm and desire to expand our bilateral relations.
With a view to further energize our co-operation, we have issued a very substantive and focused Roadmap on the India-Belarus partnership.
Therefore, I am confident that the outcomes and understandings reached during my discussions with the Belarusian leadership will help propel our relationship to an even higher trajectory in future.
Even as we deepen and diversify our bilateral relationship in many directions, we can also further consolidate the excellent cooperation between India and Belarus in multilateral forums over the past years.
Given our similar approaches to major international issues, I am confident that India and Belarus can continue to further our respective regional and global agenda through mutual support and understanding.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Among my engagements today, I had the privilege of installing a bust of the Father of the Indian nation, Mahatma Gandhi at this prestigious University.
His message of truth and non violence is as relevant today as it was in his time - as the world confronts the challenges of violent conflict, terror and large scale displacement of populations.
We are, therefore, happy to share an image of this apostle of peace with the people of Belarus and are happy that they value his legacy.
I would also like to convey to you all the warm greetings of the people of India.
I wish you all every success in your future endeavours.
Thank you!
It gives me great pleasure to join youon the occasion ofthe 62nd National Film Awards function.
The National Film Awards stands for immense honour befitting the highest governmental recognition in the field of cinema.
I welcome and congratulate all the recipients of the 62nd National Awards.
You have done India proud and placed our cinema yet again on the global radar.
My compliments to the entire family which has given so much to Indian cinema.
I wish Shri Shashi Kapoor a long and healthy life.
Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
The Indian film industry is today the largest film industry in the world in terms of number of movies being produced.
Digitization of film screens have allowed distributors to release films simultaneously across multiple screens which allows 60 to 80 per cent of theatrical revenues to be collected in the first week itself, something which was unheard of in the past.
By now mainstream Hindi cinema is internationally recognized.
We must also make focused efforts to project our regional films whose numbers as well as content are equally impressive and deserve global attention.
We live in a rapidly changing world to which the film industry will have to adjust and adapt.
Technology has brought down the costs of production and expanded the mechanisms of dissemination.
Still cameras and cell phones that record video can be now edited on a home computer and uploaded on the net.
I also understand 2014 saw the launch of four film and entertainment focussed investment funds which is welcome evidence of the growing corporatisation of the sector.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Cinema in India crosses all boundaries of region, caste, creed and religion.
It reflects the immense diversity of our nation which is home to different cultures, religions and languages.
It shows the confluence of modernity and tradition as well as our ancient past and billion aspirations for the future.
Digitization and the advent of modern technologies do not mean that we lose touch with the grass roots.
Our content has to be our strength as it is entrenched deeply in our vibrant cultural milieu.
I am told that this year yet again the youth have made their mark.
I am also delighted that the winner of the Best Female Playback Singer this year is young Uthara, who is all of ten years old.
The flowering of creativity amongst our youth holds tremendous promise for the future.
It reassures us that we will continue to lead the world not just in number of films produced but also in the quality of our cinema and the top class talent in our industry.
Friends,
The Government of India is taking a number of steps for strengthening and promoting Indian cinema and the film industry.
The Government is planning to set up a National Centre of Excellence for Animation, Gaming, and Visual Effects.
A National Film Heritage Mission is to be undertaken by the National Film Archives of India for conservation/preservation, restoration and digitization of films made in the country.
The Government also proposes to set up a Film Facilitation Unit which will act as a facilitation point for filmmakers and production houses from foreign countries to enable them come to India and shoot their films in India.
I am confident these measures will provide significant impetus to the growth of our film industry.
Over the years the national awards have stood for excellence in all aspects of cinema in various relevant categories recognising talent in feature, non-feature, regional, technical, parallel and popular genres.
For those striving towards the pinnacle of success in celluloid, herein lies the greatest honour in this country.
I take this opportunity to once again congratulate each one of the Award Winners and wish everyone of them as well as all from the film industry gathered here continued success in the pursuit of excellence.
I am confident that your creativity will touch new heights in the years ahead and you will continue to provide the people of our nation and the world superior as well as value based entertainment.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
At first, let me congratulate the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) for organizing this annual conclave aimed at creating a strong, sustainable CSR movement in the country.
I also compliment the National Foundation for Corporate Governance, with whom the CII has partnered for this 2015 edition of the Summit.
The government has over the last few months articulated the key national priorities and programmes.
You are leaders with sharp business acumen, valued experience and wide expertise.
You are entrusted with the responsibility to manage the development of your business into models of excellence.
Remember that this calls for not only sound application of management principles, but also better appreciation of the socio-economic reality in which your companies operate.
You have a bigger purpose than to merely earn profits.
You, as conscientious industry heads, would do well to build this emerging gospel of doing business into your corporate blueprint.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Mahatma Gandhi had espoused the socio-economic philosophy of trusteeship.
It provided a means for wealthy people to be trustees to look after the welfare of the common man.
CSR gradually evolved into the corporate framework.
Though a business entity incurs short-term costs without direct financial benefit, yet, it gains in the long run through the promotion of social and environmental change.
Shouldering the task of socio-economic development is increasingly considered a shared responsibility of the government and the industry.
This CSR consciousness has received a renewed impetus through a legal framework in the Companies Act, 2013.
The Act also provides such companies to spend in a financial year at least two percent of the average net profits made by it during the three immediately preceding financial years.
A structured development strategy is now required to ensure that these funds are efficiently deployed in areas most beneficial to society.
In a country as vast as India, scalability is critical to the success of programmes.
Leading industry associations like CII must encourage pooling of funds by companies to create large high impact programmes.
In this context, the Foundation set up by CII to reinforce the CSR initiatives of various businesses is commendable.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It calls for intensive collaborative efforts of the government and the corporate sector to provide the basics for improving the quality of life in our rural and urban areas.
The corporate sector must provide renewed impetus to CSR initiatives towards cleanliness, health and education.
The Government has launched several important schemes in this direction.
The corporate sector can work at various models to develop a synergetic relationship in the implementation of these schemes.Swachh Bharat MissionSaansad Adarsh Gram Yojana
The private sector can extend the good work to rural areas by meeting the infrastructure requirements in government schools and investing in teacher up-skilling.
Companies can adopt specific blocks or districts for such intervention.
This can be synergized with efforts to tackle malaises like malnutrition and other health-related issues.
It is heartening to note that CII through its member-companies has committed to build about 10,000 toilets in schools.
This effort will not only help develop quality culture but also bring children, especially the girl child, to schools.
In less than a decade, we will possess the largest working-age population in the world.
The onus is on us collectively to train and skill 50 crore youth by 2022.
I am confident that the industry will prove to be more-than-an-able partner in the efforts of the government.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
While developing programmes, industry leaders and CSR experts must look at issues that are relevant to different regions.
At the same time, they must ensure that companies look across India and not concentrate on a few pockets.
The industry must work closely with non-governmental organizations.
They have the pulse of development needs at the grassroots and can provide last mile connectivity in the delivery of programmes.
The India@75 programme of CII was started with a vision to see India emerge as a world leader through economic strength, technological vitality and moral leadership by 2022.
It is a platform to bring together young entrepreneurs who want to make a difference to the country.
CSR must become a critical component of this initiative.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Equally important is to sustain the work that a company has initiated in this area.
I am told that the Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs, Bombay Stock Exchange and CII have joined hands to develop the world's first CSR exchange.
It will help the corporate sector to become socially responsible, connect with implementing partners, and comply with the new CSR requirements.
I compliment you all for the same.
I look forward to receiving its outcomes and the work plan for the coming year.
I wish the Summit great success.
I also wish you all Godspeed in your endeavours.
Thank You.
Jai Hind.
Your Excellency,
Distinguished guests,
I am particularly delighted that you have honoured us by staying at the Rashtrapati Bhavan.
Mr. President,
Although you have travelled here in your previous capacities on a number of occasions, this is a special visit.
This time, you are visiting India as a leader of the National Unity Government in Afghanistan, as President of a proud nation with whom India has a cherished history of profound cultural, religious and civilisational bonds.
We are happy that our bilateral co-operation, rooted in the age-old bonds of friendship between our two peoples, has been so constructive and fruitful.
We believe that the enduring trust and mutual understanding between India and Afghanistan goes beyond political and strategic considerations.
Our shared history and geography are a compelling factor in nurturing our close ties.
Because of this historical reality, there has been strong and sustained support in India for our engagement with Afghanistan in its post-conflict economic reconstruction effort.
We are confident that over the next few years, Afghanistan will see a significant transformation across its sectors and in all areas of its social and economic advancement.
We look forward to this with all sincerity.
We consider it a privilege to share our capabilities and experience in nation-building and inclusive development with our Afghan brothers.
Our engagement with Afghanistan, Your Excellency, has neither an expiry date nor a timeline.
As a friend and neighbour, India will always stand firmly beside Afghanistan.
To this end, our Strategic Partnership looks to strengthen and diversify our bilateral engagement in the coming years, including by forging a more robust trade and investment relationship between our private sectors.
I am confident, Mr. President, that your interactions with our Government during this State Visit will give you a very clear perception of our purpose and commitment.
to peace in Afghanistan and the prosperity of its people and
Jai Hind.
It is indeed a proud privilege for me to be present amidst you today for the Fourth Annual Convocation of IIM Raipur to deliver the convocation address.
Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Education enriches lives, advances thinking, propagates new thought and enhances human capacity.
Given that knowledge will spur growth in the future, it is essential that we prepare a large pool of skilled and capable manpower who can drive rapid economic growth of our country and enable us to deal with poverty, deprivation and backwardness.
Keeping in mind the need to build a knowledge society, the Indian Institute of Management was set up in Raipur in 2010.
I am happy that IIM Raipur is relentlessly pursuing its objectives of excellence in teaching, learning and human resource development.
I understand the new state-of-the art campus at Naya Raipur will provide amenities comparable to any world class institute.
Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Setting up of more and more institutions to impart higher education is important.
In fact, the Ministry of Human Resource Development has announced that 22 new higher education institutions will be established.
These are six new IITs, seven new IIMs, three IISERs four new Central Universities/Tribal Universities and one NIT as well as an IIIT spread over several states in the country.
It is however equally essential that with the physical expansion of educational infrastructure, the education imparted to our students should also be of a high quality.
The Government is also taking proactive steps to ensure that students receive the required knowledge and skills that are essential to meet new needs.
An important decision taken recently in this regard is the setting up of a National Ranking Framework for higher educational institutions.
I hope this will generate healthy competition amongst our institutions for excellence, including IIMs.
This will enable our students and teachers obtain quality education at a fraction of the cost while solving the issue of access to higher education in remotest areas of our country.
It will also help overcome the faculty shortage which is constantly a constraint in almost all our institutions.
The Government along with the Indian Banks Association is also revising guidelines for ensuring financial support to each potential student so that no one is denied of higher education.
This will empower meritorious students from low income groups benefit from quality education available at premier institutes such as yours.
Management solutions are applicable to all domains.
IIMs can partner with IITs and identify research goalposts that may have larger social relevance.
While IITs could provide technical solutions for the same, IIMs can make available their managerial expertise.
I am happy to know that IIM Raipur has partnered All India Institute of Medical Sciences in a novel initiative to develop programs in healthcare management.
I am also glad that the centers for excellence planned at IIM Raipur are meant to address socially relevant problems, such as Resource Management, Energy Management, Disaster Management, Accreditation and Education, Healthcare Management, Innovation and Entrepreneurship Management.
Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Our academic institutes have to be dynamic and hands-on in facing emerging challenges.
Students today, far from being passive recipients of education imparted by the teachers, are active demand centres gradually seeking to re-define knowledge requirement.
Institutions of higher education have to promote a culture of excellence and develop core competencies.
They have to expand capacity to cater to more students and at the same time uphold the quality of instruction.
They have to resort to technology tools like e-classrooms and knowledge to enable sharing of ideas and intellectual resources like lectures and tutorials.
We must also be pro-active in developing a management research culture in the country for which IIMs need to collaborate with best of institutions in the world.
The students of today would be engaged in their lifetime in jobs that perhaps do not exist today.
They have to be taught critical skills and transferable competencies.
They have to be infused with qualities of creative-thinking and problem-solving.
They have to be encouraged in their quest to unearth the hidden and to experience joy in discovering the unknown.
They have to be trained to possess a universal mindset to enable them interact in the melting pot of the globalized world.
Friends,
Research and innovation is the cornerstone of any academic endeavour.
Their spin-offs could be large and immensely beneficial to wide spectrum of the society.
It is innovation due to which industrial enterprises show high growth momentum and keep themselves ahead of their competitors.
We have to strive harder.
Our academic institutions and industry have to engage with one another and benefit mutually from partnerships in joint research, curriculum development and setting up of chairs, incubation centres and research parks.
IIMs must assume greater responsibility for overall development and mitigation of problems concerning our society, community and nation at large.
The faculty in IIMs should provide consultancy for policy and project implementation challenges that both Union and State Governments face.
Graduates from IIMs should take up projects of relevance to the people of the state and try start companies and corporation which would contribute to the economic development of the area.
Friends, Members of the faculty, students,
Let me congratulate all the graduating students on their success and achievement.
Convocation signifies the culmination of the phase of formal education.
It also symbolizes the beginning of a new journey where the knowledge you have gained and the skills you have acquired will be put to sterner test.
You will achieve success but at times you may face adversity.
It is in mitigating those trying circumstances that you will prove your mettle.
Your discipline, commitment and determination will help you navigate through difficult terrain.
Remember that leaving this academic world does not mean you stop learning as there is knowledge to be gained everywhere and almost everyday from life.
Life rewards those who engage in life-long learning.
I request the student community of IIM Raipur to always keep in mind the fact that this wonderful education you have received is a contribution of the nation, state and community.
The nation invests in its Institutions and Universities because students are our future.
Students, in turn, have an important responsibility, not just to themselves and their families but also to this country and the community as whole.
I am confident that the students who have earned their degrees today will take part in nation-building of this great country in a meaningful way.
The youth of our country are the future stewards of this nation and inheritors of a glorious civilization.
As we march towards becoming a developed nation, each one of you can play an important role in our progress.
If the targets of eradication of poverty, health for all, education for all, power for all and higher living standards for all are to be achieved in the near future, it is our youth who must rise to the challenge.
Strive hard not only to achieve your goals but also to make this country a better place for everyone who lives here.
I wish you a bright career and fulfilling life ahead.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I am also glad to have made use of this opportunity to visit Mizoram, which is my first occasion after I assumed the office of the President of India.
Let me thank you all for welcoming me to your State and University.
In particular, the Campus of Mizoram University with its pleasant surroundings and quiet atmosphere is ideally suited for the pursuit of learning.
The Mizo people are a close-knit society marked by a complete absence of class distinction and gender discrimination.
They are well-known for their hospitality, and are of kind, selfless and helpful nature.
Dear graduating students:
It is hearty to see the joy of accomplishment in all of you.
As you step out of your academic universe today, be assured that your education will always keep you in good stead; you will thrive wherever you go and shine whatever you do.
Having said that, I want to remind you all that you owe something to the society at large.
The educated is a trustee of a special responsibility.
The upliftment of your less fortunate compatriots is a sacred task that bright people like you must perform.
This obligation to your country is something that you must always cherish.
It is a bond that you must not sever.
So, go; live your dreams.
At the same time, live the dreams of your country and countrymen.
An emerging India offers enormous opportunities for the youth of Mizoram.
Both the Central Government and the Delhi Government have taken firm action, by not only apprehending and punishing the accused but also putting in place measures to ensure that such incidents do not recur.
It is ironical that our higher education system, which is capable of producing world-class scholars, loses them to foreign universities.
A serious scrutiny is necessary to counter this avoidable trend.
I am confident that the takeaways would be implemented within the timeframe.
Friends:
To make learning more effective, teaching pedagogy must be refined, curricula up-dated, inter-disciplinary approach adopted and evaluation mechanism reformed.
To make faculty gain greater expertise in their field, faculty development programmes must be conducted.
To achieve excellence, core competencies must be identified and nurtured.
To create quality awareness, every institution must be benchmarked and accredited.
The National Knowledge Network must be put to good use in these endeavours.
For that, an industry-interface cell must be set up and industry experts in governance structure co-opted.
Ministry-level coordination is necessary to address the difficulties.
Friends:
Universities must recognize these evolutions in education and prepare themselves to deal with this dynamic environment.
Friends:
A way forward could be to give wings to the ingenious ideas of students and grassroots innovators.
Novel ideas that can be transformed into marketable products deserve mentoring.
An initiative taken in several central universities is the setting up of Innovation Clubs.
Activities of these clubs must be dovetailed with innovation incubators located in IITs and NITs in the region.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
At the outset, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the recipients of these Awards who have contributed to the growth of geo-sciences in our country through their inspirational and dedicated work.
Over time, the scope of these Awards was widened to accommodate new and relevant fields of geo-scientific development.
I compliment the Ministry of Mines for this initiative.
It is heartening to note that these prestigious Awards not only recognize lifetime contributions but also take cognizance of the outstanding efforts of young researchers.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Since ages, it has defined the trajectory of human civilizations and their transitions.
The findings within the domain of this scientific field have shaped the Stone Age, Copper Age, Bronze Age and Iron Age.
Outcomes that have emerged from geo-scientific research have contributed to scientific progress in no small measure.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It has helped produce a large pool of talented geo-scientists who have left an indelible mark in different realms from the lofty Himalayas to the abyss of the oceans, the scorching deserts, the remote forests and the freezing Arctic.
This apex organization has spawned a number of academic organizations, research institutes and exploration agencies.
I am pleased to see the tradition of research and development being maintained and further nurtured in the different institutes and organizations in our country.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Our mineral endowment poses both a challenge and an opportunity for geo-scientists.
The Government is committed to promote research and development in this area.
The geo-scientists should evolve an efficient work plan for development, conservation and augmentation of these precious mineral resources.
They should put forward innovative ideas to achieve sustainable development of our country and at the same time address societal concerns.
No part of the globe is today immune from the menace of environmental disaster.
Our nation, too, has bore the brunt of a series of natural calamities in the recent times.
They have resulted in a severe loss of life and property.
The occurrence of many of these disasters is attributed to human interference with the natural balance.
There is, therefore, a need for more objective research by the geo-scientific community in the field of disaster management to mitigate environmental hazards and ensure greater resilience to such adversities.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
With these words, I conclude.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Your HighnessSheikhTamim bin Hamad Al-Thani,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It gives me great pleasure to welcome Your Highness SheikhTamim bin Hamad Al-Thani and the distinguished members of your delegation to India on your first State visit.
We have fond memories and vivid recollections of the memorable visits of your respected father, His Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani to India in 1999, 2005 and 2012.
We also remember the visit of Her Highness Sheikha Mozah to India in 2006.
These are important milestones in our relations.
The visit of the then Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh, to your country in November 2008 marked a significant step forward in further strengthening our bilateral ties.
Your Highness, our two countries have deep and rich historical connections based on geographic proximity and cultural commonalities.
Qatar is a part of our extended neighbourhood.
Our civilizational links find expression in our mutually beneficial, growing economic and commercial exchanges and close people-to-people contacts.
There is a lot that we can do together to realize the existing potential in our trade and investment ties.
The rich experience of our globally reputed companies in executing infrastructure projects of the highest standards is at the disposal of our Qatari friends.
We are confident that they would be worthy partners in Qatar's economic progress and would contribute meaningfully towards your country's preparations for the 2022 FIFA World Cup.
India deeply values Qatar as a reliable source of energy.
It is time that we convert our commercial synergies into a deeper energy partnership through India-Qatar joint ventures in refineries and petrochemicals projects in India, as also through joint exploration in third countries.
Your Highness, India is currently among the fastest growing economies in the world.
To meet the legitimate aspirations of our people, we need to continue on an inclusive and high-growth trajectory.
Foreign investment caps have been eased in construction, railways and defence sectors.
We look forward to new partnerships and collaborations in areas of common interest.
Your Highness, Qatar has generously embraced a large number of Indian expatriates and has encouraged them to flourish and prosper, for which we sincerely thank you.
The positive contribution that the Indian community in Qatar has made towards the development and progress of their host country has been well acknowledged and appreciated.
We are confident of the continued support of Your Highness in ensuring their safety and well-being.
Your Highness, you come from a region which is of vital importance to us.
Peace and stability in West Asia is in our common interest.
Our cooperation is necessary for countering terrorism and maritime piracy that affect both of us.
We deeply value your sincere affection for India and our people as also the personal commitment and contribution of His Highness Father Emir in strengthening our close relations.
I am confident your visit will write a glorious chapter in our excellent bilateral ties.
With these words, Ladies and Gentleman, I invite you all to join me in raising a toast:
- to the continued health and well being of His Highness SheikhTamim bin Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani,
- to enhanced cooperation between India and Qatar, and
These awards were instituted in 1983 to promote a competitive spirit amongst mine operators to improve safety standards in mines.
I would like to congratulate all the outstanding performers in the field of mine safety who have been awarded today.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Intensive mechanization and use of new technology has driven production to high levels.
The business model in this sector requires them to run on thin profit margins.
Sometimes, investments in safety standards are ignored for short term gains.
Effective prevention of work-related accidents, injuries and occupational diseases could render sizeable socio-economic benefits.
Organizations in the mining industry need to proactively address potential safety problems through a comprehensive approach.
A culture of prevention rather than a culture of reaction is required in the mining industry as a value-driven commitment towards zero tolerance to such incidents.sine qua non
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Moreover, mine safety has benefitted from improvements visible in mode of access into mine, transportation system for men and materials, strata control, ventilation of underground workings, mechanization of operations and use of safety gadgets, improved rescue procedures, better training, and health surveillance.
With expanding scale of mining operations, intensification of mechanization and extension of mining activities to adverse geo-mining conditions, the management of occupational health and safety (OHS) issues are likely to become more complex.
OHS challenges have to be dealt at both the mine level as well as business level.
Mitigating these challenges call for enhanced application of information technology solutions.
An OHS management system can deliver considerable benefits, including minimizing operational risks and liabilities, meeting regulatory requirements and customer demands, improving corporate image, and achieving competitive advantage.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Mines that have adopted modern technology have expanded their businesses by exploiting deposits of lower grades which were hitherto considered uneconomic.
At the same time, they have gained extensively in terms of safety as improved technology has raised the safety profile of mining operations.
It is necessary to have in place an effective industry-wise skill development mechanism to achieve accident-free mining.
For that, a proper understanding is needed about the inter-dependence between work-place environment, technology and operational skill requirement.
Along with that, the demand for trainers will also be high.
The mineral industry should take the lead in filling this gap by setting up world-class centres for capacity building and skill development of mine workers.
Such training should impart real life skills to mine workers for identification of hazards and avoidance of dangers in routine and non-routine tasks.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I urge the apex management in mining companies to usher in an effective safety management system.
Everyone should come together to make mines safe for our miners.
I am confident that substantial improvement in mines safety will occur in the years to come.The future depends on what you do today
With the hope that the National Safety Awards (Mines) will continue to be the catalyst in enhancing occupational health and safety standards among our mine workers, I conclude.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
It is a sheer delight to visit your institution situated in the Kamand valley, which beckons with its pristine and natural beauty.
The simple lifestyle of the local agrarian people; their traditional songs, dances and crafts, enhance the innate grandeur and magnificence of this place.
The tranquility of this place provides the perfect setting for a seat of higher learning.
IIT Mandi has gradually expanded its academic programme.
It offers B-Tech in the streams of computer, electrical and mechanical engineering.
It has plans to introduce B-Tech in Civil Engineering from August, this year.
Undeterred by the relative remoteness of the location and paucity of physical infrastructure, this Institute has made best efforts to maintain the quality of education.
I compliment the management, faculty and staff of IIT Mandi for their energy, dynamism and commitment in nurturing this Institute most admirably in its formative years.
It stands for excellence in scientific and technical education.
They have earned respect for their intellect, diligence and professionalism.
I am sure that with hard work and determination, IIT Mandi will keep up the good name of the IIT brand, and its students will shine wherever they go.
My dear students:
I congratulate all of you who have been awarded degrees today.
Developing professional competence apart, these centres of scientific learning must induce social orientation in their students.
They must help create a pool of bright and motivated youth who will use their knowledge and ingenuity to find solutions to socio-economic problems.
I am glad to learn that IIT Mandi has established an Inter-disciplinary Socio-technical Practicum in collaboration with the Worcester Polytechnic Institute of USA.
Our higher educational institutions are an integral part of the local eco-system.
They must assume greater responsibility for overall development of their region.
The Government has taken important initiatives, aimed at financial inclusion, creation of model villages, Clean India and digital infrastructure.
I have urged our institutions of higher learning to adopt five villages each and convert them into model villages in line with the Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana.
I am confident that IIT Mandi will take active part in this drive.
The growing demand for engineering education has resulted in the establishment of a number of technical institutions.
Yet in this proliferation drive, quality of instruction and physical infrastructure has taken a backseat.
The educational standard of our country at the tertiary level has been starkly brought out by two reputed international surveys.
They have graded not a single Indian institution amongst the top two hundred universities in the world.
We do have a few institutions that can do much better in the rankings with a more proactive and methodological approach.
A higher rank can open fresh avenues of growth and placement for students.
It can also encourage a greater flow of faculty and students from abroad, opening new vistas of frontier technology.
Newly-created institutions will take some time to be in the reckoning.
They must identify one or two departments, in which they have core competence, and nurture them into centres of excellence.
The quality of faculty must be of a high order to provide students world-class instruction.
To bring about qualitative changes in teaching, the newly-established IITs must leverage the expertise available in the older IITs.
The National Knowledge Network offers a platform for academic institutions to collaborate peer group learning in emerging areas.
Our educational institutions must make an effort to develop linkages with international academic institutions.
In this context, it is heartening to note that IIT Mandi had signed an MOU in 2011 with TU9, the nine leading technical universities of Germany.
You must make full use of these inter-linkages to provide global exposure to your faculty and students.
Knowledge and innovation are the keystones of progress.
Competitive advantage can be derived from an eco-system conducive to new learning, research and innovation.
Inter-disciplinary approach in course curricula and research, strengthening under-graduate research and making research integral to the teaching-learning process must garner focused attention.
An industry-interface cell must be in place.
The older IITs have a strong alumni network.
They leverage the expertise of many of their alumni who have done well in their chosen fields.
The newer ones must make every effort to connect with their alumni.
They could be made a part of governance structures, or engaged in business and project mentoring and curriculum design.
I am certain that the alumni of IIT Mandi will involve themselves, in due course, in the affairs of this Institution in a meaningful manner.
Friends:
Before concluding, let me say that higher educational institutions, particularly engineering institutes, must promote a scientific temperament and a spirit of inquiry in their students.
They must encourage their students to follow their curiosity and explore their creativity.
They must equip their students to think beyond their textbooks.
They must spur ingenious ideas in them.
I also wish the management and faculty good luck for their endeavours.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I would like to, first of all, congratulate the All India Ayurveda Mahasammelan and Vidyapeeth for organising this 58th All India Convention on Ayurveda and providing an important forum for the experts in this field to exchange views, deliberate on the modern application of this ancient science and collectively address the task of promoting its use.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Ayurveda, as a science, belongs to India.
It is the oldest surviving system of medicine in the world.
Its origins have been traced back more than 5000 years.
It is believed that the concepts of Ayurveda were known to the people of the Indus Valley Civilization.
The science was significantly developed during the Vedic period of our history.
We see that Arabic works derived from our Ayurvedic texts reached Europe by the 12th Century.
Even those of us who are not formally trained in Ayurveda have embraced its principles in our dietary preferences and day to day routine.
Due to the simple nature of the ingredients in Ayurvedic remedies, many of us prefer to rely upon Ayurveda to avoid the harmful side effects of modern medicine.
Government of India has, today, a full-fledged Ministry of AYUSH for the development and promotion of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy.
This Ministry has been working with the practitioners of our indigenous medicinal systems to develop and strengthen education and training in these sciences.
The Sushruta Samhita and Charaka Samhita are now available to students in Hindi and English.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is based on the perception that life represents a relationship between the atma or soul, mana or mind, indriya or senses and sarira or body.
Ayurvedic doctors believe that this equilibrium is necessary for good health.
Creating such a balance helps to heal the sick, to maintain the health of those who are well, and to prevent disease and promote quality of life.
I would like to see Ayurvedic medicine being demystified and popularized through informative marketing and user friendly packaging; I would like to see the day when we have mobile clinics delivering Ayurvedic treatment and medicine through the villages in all parts of India.
I would particularly like to encourage the youth of India to study, safeguard, practice and propagate this ancient knowledge system.8.
It is believe that centuries ago, the medicinal systems of Ayurveda and Siddha had laid down protocols for successfully treating diseases that resembled the diseases that we know today as HIV and tuberculosis.
If these remedies could be researched and the findings pursued, they could bring new hope to millions and revolutionize modern medicine.
To achieve this, I would like to see greater collaboration between ayurvedic and allopathic researchers to widen the database of treatment protocols and successful medical practices for the benefit of our people.
It would also be appropriate to establish channels of direct connectivity between Ayurvedic laboratories and drug manufacturers.
Some modern hospitals are additionally offering Ayurveda in the name of integrative medicine.
I would definitely encourage hospitals all over India to add the facility and service of Ayurvedic treatment in whichever way they can.
In the same context, the importance of Yoga has been acknowledged for protecting health and curing disease.
Thank you!
Jai Hind!
At the outset, let me thank the University for inviting me and giving the opportunity to address this august gathering.
With a long tradition of pursuing excellence in teaching and research, several departments of this prestigious University are covered by the University Grants Commission (UGC) and the Department of Science and Technology for special assistance and fund support.
This University has research collaborations with leading research and technology institutions in India and abroad.
It counts amongst its distinguished alumni a former Prime Minister and such others including Nobel Laureate Late Dr. Har Gobind Khorana, leading figures in public life and civil servants.
That this University has excelled in providing quality education has been recognized internationally.
I applaud you all for this achievement.
I am confident that you will touch greater heights through the same spirit of dedication and commitment.
Dear graduating students:
I can see a palpable sense of delight in you.
In this moment of glory, you must comprehend the hopes and expectations that your near and dear ones, the society and the nation at large have from you.
India is a shining example of democratic polity and pluralistic society.
Democracy not only gives rights but also entails responsibilities.
Educated youth must play a vital role in building a resurgent new India.
Your education has given you an opportunity to make a difference.
This is the time to engage with our beautiful, complex, and sometimes noisy democracy.
I am particularly happy to note that two thirds of the PhD graduates are women.
My special congratulations to them.
Our universities must produce men and women of character and integrity.
I am confident that you will live your dream, and that of your country and countrymen.
As such, education plays a decisive role in shaping the destiny of nations.
At the apex of the education system is the university.
Indian universities have potential to be the leading institutions in the world.
For that, urgent improvements in academic management are needed.
To make learning more effective, teaching pedagogy must be refined, curricula up-dated regularly, an inter-disciplinary approach adopted and evaluation mechanism reformed.
To make faculty up-to-date in their field of knowledge, faculty recharge programmes must be conducted.
To pursue excellence, core competencies must be identified and centres of excellence nurtured.
These could be facilitated through an industry-interface cell as well as by induction of industry experts in governance mechanisms.
Some of them could be associated for academic management through governing bodies; and for business and project mentoring and curriculum design.
As the persuasive power of a university extends beyond the classroom and teaching, it can act as a role-model to usher in socio-economic development.
The central government has launched: (i) Swachh Bharat Mission, aimed at a Clean India by 2019; (ii) Digital India programme, to usher in a digitally-empowered knowledge society; and (iii) Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY), to create model villages through their holistic development.
Our academic institutions must take active part in these initiatives.
Due to its advantage of speed, scale and efficiency, it is fast catching up as the preferred mode of learning.
Choice-Based Credit System has been introduced that will provide students mobility across the higher educational system.
Universities must note these evolutions in education and take steps to maximize benefits.
Many innovative ideas are born out of the ingenuity of the common man.
Mentoring them to validate ideas and design viable products calls for the development of an innovation value-chain.
Higher learning institutions, due to their multiple linkages, can propel this eco-system.
Your University is a pioneer on many fronts.
You, too, can open such a club and link some of the ingenious ideas of grassroots innovators in this region to innovation incubators in technical and research institutions.11.
Our institutions must fire the power of imagination of their students.
The teacher must encourage the taught to think beyond books, question concepts and accept a proposition only after investigation.
Students must have a grand vision which they can, through research and inquiry, translate into reality.
I once again compliment the graduating students and wish them a bright future ahead.
I also wish the management and faculty of Panjab University the very best for the future.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I am told that this week-long festival was marked by fruitful interactions between grassroots innovators and various stakeholders of the innovation eco-system, both within and outside the country.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Ladies and Gentlemen:
These potential entrepreneurs require technical assistance.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This will provide the banking personnel an opportunity to interact with the innovators and gain insights about how best to support them.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I applaud NABARD for incorporating in its corporate mission the promotion of innovative initiatives, and for working towards its achievement through a systematic and strategic approach.
Particularly, the effort of NABARD in the sphere of financing rural innovations through the creation of a separate fund is praiseworthy.
Leveraging its experience of over three decades, NABARD will have an important role to play in fulfilling the objectives of an innovation-oriented India.
I once again compliment NABARD for organizing this meaningful dialogue on financing of innovation.
I call upon all the concerned agencies to start working on the various recommendations that have emerged from the deliberations.
I urge the Ministry of Finance to support the banks in whatever manner possible to enable them to be more accessible and accountable towards innovators.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
At the outset, let me compliment the Indian Armed Forces for organizing this exhibition to walk down the memory lane to recognize and celebrate the bravery of the Indian soldiers who laid down their lives during the First War.
This occasion reminds the world community of the immense loss of life and material that the world had to endure in pursuit of global peace and stability.
In this effort the Indian soldiers played an important role in the various theatres of the War.
The Indian contribution of a volunteer army to the war effort was large in comparison to many other contributing nations.
This needs to be recognized and celebrated.
Today, we pay our respects and honour these men.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Today, conflicts arising out of pernicious designs of some terror outfits are claiming thousands of valuable lives in many parts of the world.
The rise of non-state actors and lethal terrorist entities is a threat to our nation.
We have developed an effective deterrence and stand ready to defend our territorial integrity.
The professionalism which our armed forces display today is a continuation of what was so bravely exhibited by the Indian soldiers in the First World War.
It will remind us all once again about the sacrifices made by our valiant soldiers and the role they played for peace and security in the world.
I once again compliment the Indian Armed Forces for organizing this memorable event.
I wish all of you the very best for the future.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Jai Hind!
I have listened with interest the summary of outcomes of the discussions that took place in this forum, as presented by Prof. Gupta.
I also thank the two distinguished delegates for sharing their perspectives.
This topic, according to me, is pertinent for any nation desirous of ensuring inclusive development for all sections of society through innovation.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Countries successful in building such a network have become innovation leaders.
As an attempt to bring educational institutions and grassroots innovators within the ambit of an inclusive innovation system, a programme for Innovation Scholars In-Residence was started in Rashtrapati Bhavan last year.
I am glad that the second batch of innovation-scholars has joined us today.
During their two-week stay at the Rashtrapati Bhavan, they will be mentored and connected with relevant stakeholders to give wings to their ideas.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Distinguished participants:
The Make in India, Clean India, and Inclusive India, under which financial inclusion is of prime essence, needs a significant push.
Many amongst you have shared your experiences about how your countries and institutions have made progress in the direction of inclusive innovation.
I am also happy at the interest evinced by you to engage with stakeholders from India.
Some of you will share your insights tomorrow as well.
I call upon you to participate in the Indian development story, which will exhibit frugal and sustainable pathways for other countries and communities.
In this era of globalization, the Indian innovations and development will not only benefit India but the rest of the world as well.
The ingenious goods and services developed through inclusive innovation, and by blending affordability, accessibility, acceptability and availability, will have the potential to transform the global landscape.
I wish a pleasant stay to the visiting dignitaries from abroad.
I invite you all to visit the Mughal Gardens at Rashtrapati Bhavan.
I wish you the very best for the future.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
At the outset, let me congratulate all the award winners for their work and contribution in the field of innovation.
I take this opportunity to also compliment the National Innovation Foundation (NIF) - India for unleashing the creative potential of the grassroots innovators and for championing the cause of inclusive innovation through its various initiatives.
In particular, I would like to place on record my high appreciation for the outstanding contribution of Prof. Mashelkar and Prof. Anil Gupta in making innovation take the shape of a movement in our country.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
There are many social needs that public, private and civil society institutions have not been able to meet fully.
At the same time, there is tremendous ingenuity amongst the people, which if tapped, could address the necessities of the common man.
Much as the blooming of the spring, the innovations by local communities, students, farmers and others could bring smiles on the faces of millions of our people.
It encourages the engagement of talent with the society to improve the quality of life.
India always has had a strong tradition of knowledge.
Our knowledge system offer tremendous scope for research involving land-to-lab investigation and lab-to-land transfer of technology.
It is important that the vast repository of indigenous knowledge is protected, documented and preserved in active collaboration with prominent practitioners of traditional knowledge.
Mid-way through this Decade (2010-20) of Innovations, we perhaps need to assess and if necessary recalibrate our approach towards harnessing the creativity of our grassroots innovators and students.
Increasing the scalability of grassroots innovations necessitates a strong linkage between the invaluable knowledge bank prevalent in our society and the formal education system.
To use our innovation potential for the greater good, the nodal governmental agencies must play an enabling role.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
A Festival of Innovation has been started at the Rashtrapati Bhavan this year.
It will help to provide a platform to bring different stakeholders together and make these entities active partners in inclusive innovation.
The innovators participating in this programme have come from various parts of our country.
I hope that an empathetic value chain for disseminating good ideas can be built upon this initiative.
These innovations are aimed at improving productivity and efficiency, and enhancing affordability and environmental quality.
Apart from developing appropriate linkages with investors, entrepreneurs and financial institutions, the Union and State governments should also consider taking up these innovations for wider diffusion through their administrative channels, particularly in economically backward regions, and tribal and remote areas.
Even then, NIF faces a potent challenge in scouting more women innovators and outstanding traditional knowledge holders.
I am sure that with sustained effort, NIF will overcome these hurdles.
Greater involvement of crucial stakeholders will provide the stimulus required for inclusive growth and development.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The encouraging steps in this direction notwithstanding, our country lags behind many others.
Yet, there are lessons to be learnt from others and experiences to be shared with countries and organizations, which have taken the lead in the field of inclusive innovation.
I look forward to the summary of the deliberations today evening and I hope that the discussions with delegates from various countries will help India take this agenda forward.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
These clubs are intended to be a platform for exchange of innovative ideas between the teaching and student communities, and grassroots innovators.
These clubs are expected to sense the unmet social needs, and search, spread and celebrate grassroots innovations.
Once these unmet needs are mapped, our pedagogy and research process could be reoriented suitably.
The representatives of Innovation Clubs will meet here during this week to discuss their achievements and future strategies.
This Festival will provide a forum to the faculty and student representatives to learn from the grassroots innovators about frugal and sustainable innovations.
Today, the second batch of innovation scholars, writers and artists have joined us here for the In-Residence Programme.
I welcome all of them to the Rashtrapati Bhavan.
I once again applaud the award winners and call upon all the innovators present here to continue generating ingenious solutions to overcome poverty, create employment and make the society healthier, happier and harmonious.
I wish the Festival of Innovations a great success.
Let me conclude in the words of Albert Einstein:
Never forget this in the midst of diagrams and equations
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
These distinguished flying Units have a glorious past and a rich tradition of professional excellence.
Since their inception, they have rendered illustrious service to the nation and done us proud.
Their rich heritage and stellar efforts in the pursuit of excellence have set a benchmark for others to emulate.
The Unit has carried out extensive flying on numerous occasions to bring relief to the stranded people and saved innumerable lives.
The nation is indeed proud of you.
I wish you all the very best for a glorious future.
JAI HIND
Your Excellency President Maithripala Sirisena,
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,
In contemporary times, our relations have become multi-faceted, encompassing trade and investment, science, education, security and defence, and above all, people-to-people exchanges.
As two cricket playing nations, we rejoice as much in the achievements of Sanath Jayasuriya and Muthiah Muralidharan as we do in our own players.
In terms of foreign tourist footfalls in Sri Lanka, India ranks number one.
The first FTA that India signed with any country was with Sri Lanka.
It is time to take our economic engagement to the next level.
I am also happy that we are promoting cooperation in the knowledge sector.
There has been a resurgence in the Indian economy over the last year, and Sri Lanka is well-placed to take full advantage of this.
We should look at steps to enhance connectivity between our two nations.
India is privileged to be a partner in Sri Lanka's development efforts, focusing on capacity building, human resource development and infrastructure support.
I am delighted that the flagship Indian Housing Project in Sri Lanka continues to make excellent progress.
Sri Lankan investment in India has also seen some remarkable success stories in the garments sector.
Excellency, your electoral victory has opened new opportunities for further strengthening our bilateral relations.
We must build on our deep and enduring links of history and culture, and work towards the shared prosperity of the people of our countries and the region.
A vast vista of cooperation beckons us.
- to the good health of His Excellency, President Maithripala Sirisena;
- to the continued progress and prosperity of the Sri Lankan people; and
- to closer friendship and cooperation between India and the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
May your meritorious service be the lodestar for others to follow suit in the coming years.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Your Excellency,
Dr. Tony Tan Keng Yam,
President of the Republic of Singapore,
Madame Mary Tan,
Distinguished Guests,
Your Excellency,
Our contacts began in the days of the Cholas, who were perhaps one of the earlier inhabitants in your land.
These intensified in the colonial era, particularly in the flow of traders, scholars and monks.
During our independence movement, many patriots from India sought to combine forces against colonial rule and were based in your country.
I am delighted to learn that you will be installing a statue of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose in your India Heritage Centre.
We are partners across the seas and are an integral part of the regional architecture in the Asia-Pacific region.
Today, we are at an interesting cusp in history, witnessing major transformations around us.
We have seen the downturn in the global economy and its impact on our region, even though we have been affected less than others.
We have seen the shift of the geo-strategic gravity towards Asia.
We have also seen the consolidation of forces in Asia.
Excellency, it shall be our endeavour to work together towards maintaining peace and stability in our region and bringing development to our peoples.
In recent years, our bilateral relationship has seen a quantitative and qualitative expansion.
This provides a contemporary setting to collaboration in the key areas where we have complementarities.
Further, this supplements our ongoing co-operation in traditional areas of economy, security, culture and people-to-people exchanges.
We appreciate your role in bringing India and ASEAN closer together.
India is also looking forward to embark upon a larger role in the Asia-Pacific.
I hope you have a successful and enjoyable visit to India.
We look forward to your inauguration of the Peranakan exhibition tomorrow which will showcase your cultural traditions to the people of India.
I hope you will be able to see some of our cultural sites and experience the pulse of our society.
Excellency, I have no doubt that the exchanges between our two countries during this commemorative year will help to further intensify our co-operation for the benefit of our peoples and peace and prosperity in our region.
Shrimati Smriti Zubin Irani, Minister for Human Resource Development;
Shri Satyanarayan Mohanty, Secretary, Department of Higher Education;
Prof. Ved Prakash, Chairman, University Grants Commission;
Vice Chancellors of the Central Universities;
Senior Officers;
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Good Morning:
I warmly welcome all of you to this Conference.
Friends:
While I await a detailed analysis of the action taken report later today, a quick look at the progress made on these action points reveals a disappointing picture.
However, only four universities have so far established centres of excellence while another five are working towards these.
Efforts aimed at engagement of central universities with industry and alumni need far greater focus and direction than at present.
The modified format of the Conference will enable you to collectively identify difficulties and evolve collaborative strategies towards overcoming these.
Friends:
Earnest efforts have been made to fulfil the commitments I made last year.
Consequent upon my approval, each Central University will now have a panel of five names of nominees who can be called as per extant instructions.
During my visit to Norway and Finland, where I was accompanied by an academic delegation from central universities, IITs and IISERs, I called upon academicians and experts to come and teach in India.
Under the Global Initiative of Academic Networks (GIAN), the HRD Ministry has asked you for a list of eminent scholars and researchers for inviting them as guest speakers or scholars.
An e-platform needs to be developed to facilitate scholars from within and outside the country to log in their details.
It shall, in due course, lead to creation of a robust database of global experts for the Indian higher education system.
This decision has been implemented and I will have the pleasure of presenting these Awards this evening.
They promise, in the near future, to become a driving force in promoting research and innovation in our universities.
Friends:
There is a need to imbue young minds with competitive spirit and a sense of pride in their alma mater.
In addition to international rankings, the universities should attempt ratings on a National Ranking Framework which needs to be expeditiously developed.
The initiative of Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) will ensure seamless mobility of students across the Higher Education Institutions in the country as well as abroad.
The credits earned by the students can be transferred and would be of great value to them in the event of their seeking migration from one institution to the other.
I urge the remaining universities to consider implementing this system from the next academic year.
Friends:
Its persuasive power extends beyond the classroom and teaching.
Its influence therefore must be tapped for the greater good.
The Central Government has launched several initiatives having enormous socio-economic significance.
In my observations so far, I have briefly touched upon some of the issues that you will deliberate upon.
It is equally important for us to focus on the challenges that lie ahead and recognize the emerging global trends that are likely to bring in sweeping changes in the higher education system worldwide.
Due to limitations of public funding, these costs get transferred to students in terms of higher fees.
Whereas universities earlier used to educate fresh scholars, they now have the added responsibility of training and re-training workers throughout their careers.
An Oxford University Study predicts automation of 47 percent occupations in the next few decades.
As innovation eliminates certain job types, changes others and creates new ones, the workforce will have to engage in lifelong learning to upgrade and refine their skills and capabilities.
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs), which first began in 2008, allow students to hear lectures and read course material on-line, and earn a degree at a fraction of the cost of the traditional systems of education.
Both SWAYAM (Study Web of Active Learning for Young Aspiring Minds) and MOOCs could pave the way for speed, scale and efficiency for teaching in the higher education system.
The Ministry of HRD and the institutes of higher learning should develop eco-systems for deriving maximum benefits from applying technology to learning.
Online instruction supplemented by periodic classroom interaction, or blended MOOCs, could provide a solution for retaining the essential elements of traditional pedagogy.
Whether through MOOCs or the formal education system, particular emphasis has to be provided by our higher learning institutions on the inculcation of core values in our students.
Our democracy has thrived on these.
The next generation must learn to recognize our diversity, inclusiveness and assimilative capacities as inherent sources of strength.The philosophy of the school room in one generation will be the philosophy of government in the next
Friends:
The teacher must encourage the taught to satiate their curiosity, question established knowledge, accept a proposition only after investigation, and pursue ingenuity.
In particular, the habit of reading and learning through books must be inculcated to sharpen their energetic and inquisitive minds.
Books also break societal and cultural barriers.
I am sure under your leadership they will rise to the occasion.
My Secretary has already explained the format of this Conference.
I expect innovative solutions to emerge out of your discussions and look forward to the results of your deliberations over these two days.
Your Excellency, President Barack Obama,
Mrs. Michelle Obama,
Excellencies,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a great honour and privilege to welcome you and the First Lady this evening, Mr. President.
After having had the pleasure of meeting you in such a banquet four years ago during your last visit to India, I am doubly delighted to be able to receive you again - this time, as the host!
Excellency, you have made history thrice-over today by becoming the first U.S. President to grace our Republic Day celebration as the Guest of Honour; by being the first U.S. President to visit India twice while in office; and by holding a second Summit-level meeting in the shortest-ever time span of four months.
These milestones make this a truly historical visit.
While I am proud that we are creating history together, I am even more pleased that we are creating a brighter future together - for our two countries and the world.
The relationship between India and the United States is a special one.
It is special because it is a relationship forged in the hearts and minds of our two people, in the commercial ties between our two businesses, in the exchanges between our two scientists and engineers and in the enduring linkages between hundreds of our institutions.
It is this strong attraction and chemistry that explains why the people of both countries have always viewed each other as friends in every opinion poll; it also explains why the relationship has consistently enjoyed bipartisan political support.
These core values not only determine how we live and how we are governed as a nation; they also define our aspirations for the future and the vision of the world we want to bequeath to our children and grandchildren.
Excellency, it is this shared vision that forms the solid bedrock of our blossoming relationship.
But in a relationship like ours that has infinite potential, there is so much more that we can and should do.
Excellency, I am glad, therefore, that our countries are deepening strategic, security and defence cooperation to make our two countries, the region and the world a safer place; the United States in partnering us in our ambitious economic and development agenda through infrastructure development, clean energy solutions, investment, technology, leveraging information technology, education and skilling; your people are also working with us in setting up Smart Cities, fighting diseases and improving water, health and sanitation.
Your presence at our cherished Republic Day Parade tomorrow will demonstrate to the world, the growing ties of friendship and trust that bind our two democracies closely.
As we create new milestones in history and chart new destination points in our shared journey into the future, your visit, Mr President, symbolizes both history and future in the making.
- The good health of His Excellency President Obama and Her Excellency Mrs. Michelle Obama;
- To the continued prosperity and well being of the United States; and
- To creating new milestones that further strengthen the bonds of friendship and cooperation between India and the United States.
My Fellow Citizens:
Fellow Citizens:
Fellow Citizens:
The legislature reflects the will of the people.
It is the platform where progressive legislation using civilized dialogue must create delivery mechanisms for realizing the aspirations of the people.
It calls for reconciling the differences amongst stakeholders and building a consensus for the law to be enacted.
Enacting laws without discussion impacts the law-making role of the Parliament.
It breaches the trust reposed in it by the people.
This is neither good for the democracy nor for the policies relating to those laws.
Fellow Citizens:
Fellow Citizens:
It is a lodestar for the socio-economic transformation of an India whose civilization has celebrated pluralism, advocated tolerance and promoted goodwill between diverse communities.
These values, however, need to be preserved with utmost care and vigilance.
The freedom inherent in democracy sometimes generates an unhappy by-product when political discourse becomes a competition in hysteria that is abhorrent to our traditional ethos.
The violence of the tongue cuts and wounds people's hearts.
Religion, said Gandhiji, is a force for unity; we cannot make it a cause of conflict.
Fellow Citizens:
But the most powerful example of India's soft power, in an international environment where so many countries are sinking into the morass of theocratic violence, lies in our definition of the relationship between faith and polity.
We have always reposed our trust in faith-equality where every faith is equal before the law and every culture blends into another to create a positive dynamic.
Wisdom of India teaches us: unity is strength, dominance is weakness.
Fellow Citizens:
Terrorism and violence are seeping across our borders.
While peace, non-violence and good neighbourly intentions should remain the fundamentals of our foreign policy, we cannot afford to be complacent about adversaries who will stop at nothing to disrupt our progress towards a prosperous and equitable India.
We have the strength, confidence and determination to defeat architects of this war against our people.
Repeated violations of the ceasefire along the Line of Control and terrorist attacks must get an integrated response through incisive diplomacy and impregnable security mechanisms.
The world must join India in fighting the menace of terrorism.
Fellow Citizens:
Economic progress is also a test of democracy.
Key economic indicators provide for much optimism.
Strengthening of the external sector, move towards fiscal consolidation, moderation in price levels, early signs of rebound in manufacturing and record agricultural production last year augur well for our economy.
Our national narrative has been shaped by the principles of its past, triumphs of today and is now ready to own the future by powering its latent potential.
Fellow Citizens:
Fellow Citizens:
This future will remain both visible and elusive if we do not discover the ability to continually cleanse ourselves of retrograde habits and social ills.
Over the past century, some have died, others have faded, but many still exist.
We are celebrating, this year, the centenary of Gandhiji's return to India from South Africa.
It is advisable to follow his example.
While we are, rightly, focused on 1915, perhaps we should cast a glance on what Gandhiji did in 1901, the year when he returned home for his first break.
The annual Congress session was held that year in Calcutta, then the capital of British India.
A shocked Gandhiji did not wait for any allotted cleaner.
Jai Hind!
Vice Chancellors,
Directors,
Heads of Institutions of higher learning and research institutions,
Faculty members, and
Dear Students:
Friends:
Distinguished heads of the institutions, faculty members and dear students:
In Parliamentary Democracy, all three wings - the Executive, the Legislature (Parliament) and the Judiciary - are the most important functional organs.
All three derive their authority from the Constitution, which clearly defines their role of policymaking, legislation, implementation of the policies and programmes, and interpreting the law by Judiciary as and when required.
You would recognize that by posing the issue on those lines, the Judiciary, along with the Parliament and the Executive, also becomes a relevant player in steering the development process in the country.
All three organs are expected to operate within their limits as prescribed by the Constitution without over-stepping them.
Friends:
When that does not happen, an important element in the functioning of a democracy gets compromised to the disadvantage of the people.
Friends:
It serves two important purposes.
It gives shape to social values and strengthens their aspirational dimension.
It also helps in guiding human behaviour towards desired social ends.
Thus, by definition, law provides the normative basis and the architecture for the conduct of public policy.
In law-making, the easy part is the act of passing a Bill (not so easy when you do not have majority!).
The harder part is the negotiations for reconciling the interests of different groups for the legislation.
A legislature is effective only if it is able to address the differences amongst stakeholders and succeeds in building a consensus for the law to be enacted and enforced.
When the Parliament fails in discharging its law-making role or enacts law without discussion, it breaches the trust reposed in it by the people.
This is neither good for the democracy nor for the policies anchored in those laws.not so easy when you do not have majority!
Distinguished heads of the institutions, faculty members and dear students:
It is normative in nature.
These norms come from laws and social practices prevalent in a society, or from international conventions that a state becomes party to.
Policies have to essentially address the concerns of different stakeholder in a society, in the larger national interest.
Friends:
Friends:
It exercises oversight, to ensure that programmes are carried out by the Executive legally, effectively and for the purposes they are intended.
Parliamentary oversight extends also to two other important functions.
Parliament enjoys exclusive power of total control on money and finance.
Every taxation and every receipt and expenditure to and from the Consolidated Fund of India is subject to the approval of the Lok Sabha or Vidhan Sabha.
Therefore, these two very important functions of the Executive are subject to the total control of the popularly-elected House.
Friends:
Dissent is a recognized democratic expression, but disruption leads to loss of time and resources, and paralyzes policy formulation.
The cardinal principle of Parliamentary Democracy is that the majority has the mandate to rule while opposition has the right to oppose, expose, and if the numbers permit, to depose.
But, under no circumstances should there be disruption of the proceedings.
A noisy minority cannot be allowed to gag a patient majority.
My dear students:
The framers also deemed it necessary to impose certain restrictions on this extraordinary legislative power by constitutionally mandating replacement of such Ordinances within a timeframe by the legislators.
Distinguished heads of the institutions, faculty members and dear students:
The proceedings in Parliament must be conducted in a spirit of cooperation, harmony and purpose.
The content and quality of debates should be of a high order.
Maintenance of discipline and decorum in the House and observance of etiquette and decency are necessary.
To retain the trust and faith of the people, the Parliament must enact laws to put in place policies that address the concerns and aspirations of the people.
Many amongst you will enter public life to serve the nation.
Take time to decide before entering as it is never a short-term option.
But having decided once, give your best.
Let this be a year of great opportunities and successes in all that you pursue.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Good evening, distinguished trustees of the Infosys Science Foundation; esteemed jury chairs, winners of the Infosys Prize 2014 and guests.
Soon, our space programme started enabling us to launch satellites into space.
The excellence of our scientists and toil of our farmers, together led to the Green Revolution of the sixties.
Today, we are self-reliant in food and a major exporter of food grains.
Such a transition has few parallels in human history.
- The years that followed have seen the emergence of strong Information Technology, Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical industries.
India is the fourth in the world to reach the Mars.
It is also the first to attain this goal in its very first attempt and at a cost of US$ 74 million, a fraction of the money spent by others.
- Science is one of the creative endeavours of human mind.
It plays a vital role in the advancement of human life and is central to technological progress.
A scientific culture must determine the choices and decisions made by individuals, societies and nations.
- Research endeavours must advance the realms of knowledge and improve the lives of the common man.
It must bring about social, environmental and economic betterment of our people.
- I congratulate all the winners of the Infosys Prize 2014 and thank them for their contributions to the world of knowledge.
I compliment the State Government for this pioneering effort of starting an integrated mobile-enabled services delivery system.
This unique initiative, which I am told is the first-of-its-kind in the country, signals a new era in Governance.
It will also enable access toSakala, the platform for time-bound delivery of services, as well as prompt redressal of grievances.
It is commendable that Karnataka, which is a leading centre of IT, has cohesively merged technology, innovation and governance to create a novel process of citizen-government engagement.
Recognizing thismantra of statecraft, Karnataka pursues the deepening of bond between the government and the governed.
These treasured scriptures provided a prescription for governance based on collaborative system between government and citizens.mantraBhagavat GitaArthashastraManusmriti
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The Preamble, the Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles of State Policy comprise the tenets of governance.
They provide a reference point for value based governance of our country.
Fundamental rights are essential for the development of personality of every individual and for the preservation of human dignity.
Parliamentary enactments, and government policies and programmes have helped transform these directives into actionable points for governance.
For instance, entitlements for food, education and job, backed by legal guarantees, have empowered citizens.
Schemes for universal healthcare and education have shown good results.
We have arranged a civilization in which most crucial elements profoundly depend on science and technology
The Direct Benefits Transfer Scheme launched in January 2013 leveraged the Aadhaar system to improve targeting, eliminate waste, usher in greater transparency, reduce transaction costs and enhance efficiency.
This initiative demonstrated how good governance practices can be consolidated using suitable technology models.
E-governance holds great promise for a quantum leap in governance standards.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It has created an eco-system for the Government to tap technology-enabled solutions for deployment in the area of governance for the benefit of the common man.
Karnataka, for one, is an IT hub portraying a success story that has few parallels.
It contributes to thirty percent of the total software exports of our country.
Karnataka also has the distinction of being the first Indian state to have a dedicated secretariat for e-governance.
I commend your passion to deploy technology in governance.
In this context, I want to express my delight at having been associated with the demonstration of 3D holography, which is a cutting-edge technology.BhoomiKaverie-swathuKaveri
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It has brought people closer, shrunk distance and alleviated geographic separation.
The total number of mobile phone subscribers in India is 93 crore with a density of 75 percent.
These numbers have significance from the policy perspective of governance.
One of the components of this programme is the availability of government services in real time from mobile platforms.
It is heartening to note that nearly five hundred G2C and over four thousand B2C services have been integrated into this platform and I am told more services are being on-boarded.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In a rapidly changing world, it is the learners, pioneers and doers who will usher in a new era for citizens.
Through your endeavours, you have displayed that and I compliment you for the same.
Do not rest on your laurels; continue with your efforts to improve governance.
With the thought that creativity in the present is essential to create a better future, I conclude.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
It is indeed a pleasure for me to be present amidst you on the occasion of presentation of the National Awards for the Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities.
It is entirely appropriate that the people of India should mark this date by honouring the selfless individuals among us and the altruistic organisations in our country who have generously worked for the empowerment of the disabled in our society.
Today we recognize them for their contribution, and the time, resources and energies that they have dedicated to bring positive change in the lives of the differently abled persons.
I congratulate them and deeply appreciate their humanity.
Government has taken the necessary steps by providing scholarships for students, creating effective teaching-learning conditions, providing material in appropriate format and facilitating the access of the disabled to educational technology and equipment that is updated and appropriate.
I would emphasize that special training of teachers is essential to enable them to be tuned to the needs of children with disabilities and guide them effectively.
I am glad that Government of India has recently revised its scheme of Assistance to Disabled Persons for Purchase and Fitting of Aids and Appliances.
The new scheme includes more devices that can be provided to students and other categories of persons with disabilities.
I would also like to underline the significance of economic empowerment of the differently abled.
Government has reserved positions for them and the private sector has launched similar initiatives.
Both the public and private sectors should be partners in improving the skills of persons with disabilities and enhancing their employability.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Many differently abled children are deprived from participating in games and activities that other children consider an integral and enjoyable part of their childhood.
Women with disabilities feel particularly disadvantaged.
Elderly disabled persons, in the twilight of their lives, are the most vulnerable.
I am confident that they will continue to lead and inspire us, by their example, to work for a better life and future for the differently abled.
Thank you,
Jai Hind!
I am delighted to be amongst you today at the inauguration of the Golden Jubilee function of the Utkal Sangeet Mahavidyalaya.
I am deeply appreciative of the efforts made by the Mahavidyalaya to keep alive Odishan art and culture.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is, therefore, only natural that performing arts have been an integral part of Indian identity and culture.
They display amazing depth, richness and diversity developed over several millennia.
Traditionally, these arts found patronage and flourished under enlightened rulers who themselves, at times, were great exponents of music and dance.
By the turn of the 20thcentury, classical music and dance in India witnessed a host of changes and re-inventions.
The most important of these were that the masters of the performing arts were now seeking to find patronage for them beyond the traditional historical domain.
This essentially meant spreading the performing arts to practitioners and audiences outside of the traditional families and communities that had been the repositories of these art forms in pre-colonial times.
These new impulses resulted in India rediscovering its culture in a manner and scale not previously seen.
Setting up of institutions like the Bhatkhande Music Institute, Lucknow and the Utkal Sangeet Mahavidyalaya, Bhubaneshwar is a continuation of this tradition wherein the State funds and promotes various forms and aspects of Indian art, music, dance, drama and culture-inherent in this is the realization that our classical arts are our link with the past and, thus, both the foundation for our current thought and the platform for our future action.
It is a matter of great satisfaction that the Mahavidyalaya has over the years lived up to the expectations that it had set for itself.
I am confident that this great institution and its students will continue to excel in the performing arts.
I once again take this opportunity to congratulate all of you on the occasion of the golden jubilee celebrations of the Mahavidyalaya and wish you all the best in your future endeavours.
Jai Hind.
Today, it has become a 150-bed hospital, alongside facilities for post-graduate education and research.
Research should be based on the convergence of different inter-connected scientific sectors
This holistic approach to neuroscience is essential to establish a credible healing system in a world-wide scenario of rising neurological disorders.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Due to lack of social understanding, there is sometimes a stigma that is unfortunately associated with such incidences.
This dissuades sufferers from seeking treatment.
Efforts have to be made to preserve the dignity of patients and prevent their isolation through social integration.
For that, public education and awareness campaigns involving all stakeholders are necessary.
The health insurance system has to be revamped to take care of the special needs of the aged.
For that to really happen though, mobilization through public awareness and sensitization through grassroots health functionaries are necessary.
Neurological disorders sometimes result in disability.
This has to be addressed through suitable rehabilitation policies and programmes in wide-ranging sectors like education, employment and social development.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is incumbent on our health sector to create adequate capacity in our medical colleges to churn out more specialists and perform cutting-edge research; and expand infrastructure in our hospitals and healthcare centres for investigation and treatment.
Advances in medical sciences occur at lightning speed today.
It is important that our medical schools undertake faculty development, up-grade the syllabi and review the horizon of their research activities.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I feel medical institutions like yours have a pivotal role to guide our health sector.
You have a responsibility to inculcate a humanistic approach in the minds of the young doctors and health professionals and orient them towards a value-based career in medicine.
There are doctors who are desirous of undergoing higher studies in premier institutions abroad to acquire greater expertise.
They should be encouraged.
Yet at the same time, they have to remember that the nation has invested in their education.
Wherever they go, they have to retain the sacred bond with their motherland.
They have to be fired by the spirit of patriotism and a sense of social responsibility.
I once again compliment everyone associated with this noble venture and wish them the very best for the future.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Sir Asutosh Mookerjee was a man of great intellect, courage and exceptional administrative ability.
Under his stewardship as the Vice Chancellor of the University of Calcutta, which he headed for five two-year terms, he transformed this institution into an important centre of learning and research.
It is indeed a rare honour to be presented with a decoration instituted in his name.
Dear graduating students:
You are richly deserving of the applause and admiration.
Convocation signifies the culmination of the phase of formal education, which you have secured through labour, resolve and devotion.
It also symbolizes the beginning of a new journey where the knowledge you have gained and the skills you have acquired will be put to sterner test.
You will achieve success but at times you may face adversity.
It is in mitigating those trying circumstances that you will prove your mettle.
Your discipline, commitment and determination will help you navigate through the rough terrain.
Life rewards those who engage in life-long learning.
Friends:
It is therefore incumbent on our seats of higher learning to mould the next generation by inculcating in them the core values of patriotism, honesty, responsibility, discipline, respect for pluralism, respect for women and compassion.
They owe to the society a duty to pay heed to its needs and aspirations.
They can do so by actively participating in social development through actionable programmes.
The Government has recently initiated theSaansad Adarsh Gram Yojana to set up model villages having improved facilities, smooth access to rights and entitlements and wider social mobilization.
The scheme also envisages financial inclusion, provision of digital infrastructure and cleanliness campaign.
I have called upon the Central higher level institutions to adopt five villages each and transform them into model villages by providing solutions to problems using resource persons and expertise available.
I urge this University to pioneer this drive in the adjoining areas.Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana
Friends:
Though our higher education sector has rapidly expanded over the last few years, we have less to trumpet about the quality of our institutes.
None of our institutions are ranked in the top two hundred positions by reputed international surveys.
While I believe that a few renowned Indian institutions can be better placed with a little more methodical approach, a vast majority of our institutions are mired in mediocrity.
A different scenario is noticeable today.
Many meritorious Indian students pursue their higher studies from foreign universities.
I was a teacher before I entered public life.
I know how gratifying it is, as a teacher, to give students the joy of learning; to make them appreciate, reflect and differentiate the strands of thinking.
I also wish the students Godspeed in their endeavours.
Jai Hind.
At the outset, let me thank all of you for inviting me to be a part of an occasion which is both joyous and revered.
A long journey with a bigger task awaits these new graduates, who I am sure will pass muster with their ability, knowledge and foresight.
It is the land of freedom fighters and social reformers like Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Veer Savarkar, Gopal Krishna Gokhale, Maharishi Karve and Mahatma Jyotiba Phule.
Friends:
Creation of growth is increasingly happening through knowledge-based sectors.
Given that knowledge will spur greater progress in the future, it is critical for us to prepare a pool of skilled and capable manpower by focusing on education.
A country can neglect education at its own peril.
The challenge of providing education with exacting standards to meet the growing aspirations of the youth, more so in a country of our size, is daunting.
Having said that, we have been firm in our determination to develop the higher education sector.
We are deficient, though, in terms of good quality institutions.
No Indian institution is ranked amongst the top 200 universities in the world as per reputed surveys, though I believe, a few of our leading institutions can do better through a systematic and proactive approach.
In the past, our seats of higher learning like Nalanda, Takshashila, Vikramashila, Valabhi, Somapura and Odantapuri were global leaders for eighteen hundred years beginning sixth century BC.
These universities attracted scholars from round the world.
It is a matter of introspection as to how we can bring our centres of higher learning back into the fold of leading institutions in the world.
Students today, far from being passive recipients of education, are active demand centres gradually seeking to re-define knowledge requirement.
Institutions of higher education have to promote a culture of excellence and develop core competencies.
They have to expand capacity to cater to more students and at the same time uphold the quality of instruction.
They have to resort to technology tools like e-classrooms and knowledge networks to enable sharing of ideas and intellectual resources like lectures and tutorials.
Friends:
They are the ripening fruits of their intellectual enterprise.
The students of today would be engaged in their lifetime in jobs that perhaps do not even exist now.
They have to be taught critical skills and transferable competencies.
They have to be infused with qualities like creative-thinking and problem-solving.
They have to be encouraged in their quest to unearth the hidden and to experience the joy in discovering the unknown.
They have to be trained to possess a universal mind-set to enable them to interact in the melting pot of an ever more globalized world.
Our higher academic institutes would do well to provide exposure of foreign institutions to their students.
In this regard, I am happy to learn that this University has innovative programmes like Global Immersion, Semester Exchange and Dual Degree through collaborations with over thirty foreign institutions.
To keep pace with the information boom as well as continual refinements in disciplines, the faculty have to be trained in content and modern pedagogies.
They have to be encouraged to attend seminars and workshops, and publish research papers.
Their spin-offs could be large and immensely beneficial to a wide spectrum of the society.
It is innovation due to which industrial enterprises show high growth momentum and keep themselves ahead of their competitors.
We have to strive harder.
Their engagement with social issues has to be at a much deeper level.
Some major initiatives aimed at inclusive development have been launched recently.
The Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana envisages the adoption of villages for holistic development and their transformation into model villages for wider replication.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to participate in the inaugural ceremony of the Commonwealth Science Conference being organized by the Royal Society for the first time in India.
The Royal Society is one amongst the great science academies of the world.
It is not only one of the oldest but also an academy with a great history of accomplishments.
The Royal Society has represented quality and defined directions in science for long decades.
For a person to be elected Fellow of the Royal Society is a signal achievement and honour.
Many of independent India's best scientists have been elected Fellows.
A star amongst them is Professor C. N. R. Rao, one of the principal organizers of this meeting.
India is particularly proud of Prof. Rao and his contributions to science and institution building.
In recognition of his services to science and the nation, he was awarded earlier this year, our highest civilian honour - the Bharat Ratna.
It is wonderful that Bangalore, India's IT hub and home to many scientific institutions is host to this Commonwealth Science Conference.
The headquarters of the Indian Space Research Organization, whose scientists are the pride of India is also located here.
The ISRO's most recent achievement of Mangalyaan or mission to Mars has been described by the Time magazine as one amongst the top 25 inventions of the year and something which portends well not just for our space programme but for science in general.
India is the fourth in the world to reach the Mars.
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
The Commonwealth is a unique international organization.
It straddles the North-South divide in the world with an immense diversity of races, religions, cultures, geographical spread and stages of development.
The larger member states at the same time share many similarities with them.
Thus, the Commonwealth is a very useful forum for dialogue, promoting understanding on global issues and forging consensus on international action.
India is a founding member of the Commonwealth and its largest member state, being home to nearly 60% of the total population of the association.
India is the fourth largest contributor to Commonwealth budgets and programmes.
It is second only to the UK in providing technical experts to Commonwealth Fund for Technical Cooperation for the purpose of extending assistance to developing Commonwealth countries.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
India is strongly committed to the fundamental values and principles of the Commonwealth.
It believes the Commonwealth, has the potential to play an even greater role in relation to contemporary challenges facing the world and can be a bridge builder between the developing and developed countries.
It is our view that the Commonwealth, with its diverse membership and democratic style of functioning based on consensus and informality, is well placed for global advocacy on contemporary issues.
It is therefore important that all Commonwealth countries get together not only to discuss contemporary issues related to science and technology but also to explore how best science can be used to address the pressing challenges that confront humanity.
India, under the guidance of our first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, adopted science and technology as a priority from the early days of our independence itself.
The creation of new educational and research institutions began from 1950 itself.
The space programme was also soon started enabling us launch rockets and satellites into space.
At the time of Independence, our agriculture sector was under-developed and we were a net importer of food grains.
It is the synergy between science and public policy which resulted in technologically upgrading our agriculture system.
The excellence of our scientists and toil of our farmers, together led to the Green Revolution of the sixties, which made our country self-reliant in food and also, a major exporter today.
Such a transition has few parallels in human history.
In the years that followed, India based research led to the emergence of a strong pharmaceutical industry followed by more recently the Biotechnology and Information Technology industries.
We in India see our future as inextricably linked to the progress we can make in the field of science and technology.
ICT and the digital revolution is rapidly transforming our lives.
India also ranks third after China and the USA in terms of number of internet users.
Nanoscience and Technology is another area of focus.
I take this opportunity to congratulate him for this wonderful initiative.
(1) Blue sky research dealing with the important developments in fundamental science, including advanced materials and medical biology.
(3) Areas where India can emerge as one of the leaders in the world.
We hope to identify such areas and support them adequately.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I understand building scientific capacity in developing nations is one of the important topics which will be discussed in this Conference.
I am also happy to learn about the initiatives the Royal Society is taking to stimulate science in Africa.
The collaboration of young scientists from Commonwealth countries with leading laboratories of the world must be enhanced.
There is also need to improve teaching and teacher quality at every level, especially schools.
I believe this Commonwealth Science Conference can be transformative for our future if concrete programmes of action can be evolved in these areas.
I understand one of the goals of this Conference is to recognize and encourage young scientists.
I also see that young scientists have been invited to participate in the meeting and present papers.
The attraction of talented students to study science and pursue a career in science is a big challenge in many developing countries and indeed the world over.
Young boys and girls from every social and economic context from every corner of the world must have the opportunity to learn the rigorous tools of science to fulfill their dreams to understand the mysteries of our planet and the universe.
I am happy to inform you of a major initiative of my Government in this regard called the Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research scheme or INSPIRE which is being implemented through our Ministry of Science & Technology.
Over the past five years, more than a million students have been provided awards from which more than 230 innovations are being processed for provisional patenting.
I encourage the Royal Society to develop programmes of international collaboration which could stretch from the West Indies to Australia, with support from national funding agencies and private philanthropy.
Together, the brilliant intellects gathered in this room can promote science and the scientific method to young people worldwide and make the world a better place.
India would be happy to collaborate in whatever manner possible, especially to strengthen the scientific base and research capabilities of the smaller countries of the Commonwealth.
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
Science is one of the creative endeavours of human mind.
Science seeks universal and fundamental truths.
Science plays a vital role in the advancement of human life and its study is central to technological progress.
Modern societies and nations must be built on scientific knowledge.
A scientific culture and logic must determine the choices and decisions made by individuals, societies and nations.
I call upon all of you gathered here to do your utmost to ensure that the Commonwealth Science Conference acts as a platform for the flowering of ingenious ideas that benefit the common man.
A facilitator to this transformative process is education, which has received considerable impetus.
It has since progressed swiftly, overcoming the difficulties that crop up in the nascent stage.
Despite operating from a temporary campus, this Institute has made best efforts to maintain the quality of instruction.
I compliment the management and faculty of NIT Arunanchal Pradesh for their energy, dynamism and commitment in steering this Institute most admirably in its formative years.
Friends, my dear students:
It is incumbent on you to lend your hand in meeting the challenges of growth and industrial development.
I am confident that you will more than fulfill the responsibilities entrusted upon you.
They would do well to not only equip our budding engineers and scientists to address contemporary issues with innovative solutions, but also inculcate in them an understanding of our society.
Friends:
Friends:
Some of the steps, I feel, that require renewed focus are inter-disciplinary approach in course curricula and research, identifying the areas of core competency and nurturing centres of excellence, strengthening under-graduate research, and making research an integral part of the teaching-learning process.
MOUs for research collaboration executed with foreign institutions have to be tracked regularly to ensure their efficacy.
NITs have to actively engage with other institutes for research collaboration and sharing of best practices.
They have to be more proactive in their interaction with the industry.
Most NITs have an industry interface cell in place.
The cell has to explore possibilities like sponsoring of chair positions by industry; drafting experts from industry in project guidance and curriculum design; and setting up incubation centres, laboratories and research parks.
They could be inducted in governance mechanisms, or utilized for business and project mentoring of students and in curriculum design.
I hope the alumni of this Institute, with the first batch to graduate today, will retain their link and communicate frequently.
Friends:
It discourages reliance on vague impressions, second hand evidence and hasty generalization.
I also wish the graduating students a bright career and fulfilling life ahead.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
These distinguished flying Units have a glorious past and a rich tradition of professional excellence.
Since their inception, they have rendered illustrious service to the Nation and done us proud.
Their rich heritage and stellar efforts in the pursuit of excellence have set a benchmark for others to emulate.
For their selfless devotion, professionalism and courage in the face of adversity, the Nation honours them today with a deep sense of gratitude and appreciation.
Besides its role of safeguarding the sovereignty of our Nation, it has always been a harbinger of humanitarian aid within our boundaries.
The relief operations rendered in the disaster hit regions, often in the face of adverse weather and tragedy, bears testimony to the fortitude, professionalism and determination of the men and women in blue.
From Kanyakumari to the mighty Himalayas, the resilience and tenacity of the Air Warriors has been a source of tremendous pride for the Nation.
The professional excellence, grit and determination exhibited by them over the past few decades is highly laudable.
Today our Nation is on the path of growth in all fields.
While the Nation grows and develops in all realms, the subcontinent also faces varied threats especially from non-state actors.
To preserve peace and harmony and promote all round development, it is imperative for us to have an effective deterrence and a strong defense.
Though as a Nation we are firmly committed to peace, we must be prepared to use our might to safeguard the sovereignty of our Nation, should the need ever arise.
We are a Nation which believes in equality in all realms.
The men and women who stand before us today epitomize our grit and determination towards this underlying cause.
I am immensely proud of our Armed Forces for leading the path in this respect.
I also take this opportunity to congratulate all the Air Warriors on parade for their exemplary standard of drill, dress and deportment this morning.
The personnel of the Unit have been decorated with several gallantry awards for their courage and valour.
Since inception, the Unit has not only undertaken and executed various operational missions but has also actively carried out various rescue missions.
The Unit has forever rendered selfless support during natural calamities.
The Nation is indeed proud of you.
I wish you all the very best for a glorious future.
I am indeed very happy to be present amidst you at the Annual General Meeting of the Indian Red Cross Society and St. John Ambulance (India).
Ladies and Gentlemen,
In recent years, India, too, has learned from its experiences and taken similar measures.
However, we are aware that more needs to be done: more vulnerable people need to be empowered; they need to have a greater ability to secure and protect themselves.
More communities need to be free from the risks of disease and the dangerous forces of nature.
To achieve that, joint efforts of state institutions and civil society will be required.
The reference document that they have brought out is adapted to Indian needs and acknowledges traditional healing methods.
This is a landmark initiative as it will serve as a basis for developing community-based first aid programmes.
Thank you.
To start with, let me thank the University for inviting me to be a part of this venerable occasion.
Through its academic programmes, it has instilled in students a national perspective.
Jamia has a wide academic profile.
Friends:
And, it is education that is one of the differentiating factors.
Education enriches human lives, advances human thinking, propagates new thought and enhances human capacity.
Economic growth in the future will depend more on efficient use of resources and deployment of better technology and processes.
Knowledge and education will propel economies even more in the years to come.
It is therefore pertinent that our education sector, particularly higher education, is able to meet this challenge.
Friends:
Yet, many of our institutes lack quality that denies students world-class education.
Many bright students leave the shores to pursue studies abroad.
We cannot lose our talent, and for that, we have to up-grade our educational standards.
There is not a single Indian institution amongst the top 200 universities in the world according to reputed surveys.
I do believe that some of our institutions are better than what the rankings project.
Our leading institutions have to approach the ratings process in a more systematic and proactive manner.
However, it is also a fact that an all-out effort to revamp our academic system is the need of the hour.
Some of the immediate steps would be to ramp up physical infrastructure including classrooms, fill up vacant faculty positions, attract talent from abroad, review and change curriculum to make it inter-disciplinary and industry-oriented, and promote centres of excellence after identifying core competencies.
The National Knowledge Network and the National Mission on Education in ICT are key technology initiatives in the education sector.
They have opened a window of opportunity in sharing of course material, lectures and best practices.
They can bridge distances, forge tie-ups amongst experts scattered by geography, and also make education less costly and more convenient.
Our institutions have to build expertise to use these technology solutions in a more effective manner.
Friends:
Our country has capability in several areas like space technology and ICT.
The successful Mars Orbiter Mission is a testimony to our growing scientific prowess.
Nevertheless, there is a general neglect on research.
Especially, the focus on research activity is lacking in our universities.
Unless our institutions become hotbeds of research activity, we as a society will fail to realize the potential that we otherwise are destined to achieve.
We have to make teaching and research an attractive career opportunity.
We have to promote research amongst under-graduate students by adopting an inquiry-based approach to subjects and project work.
We have to attract meritorious students for doing PhD.
Cutting edge research calls for multi-disciplinary approach and pooling of expertise.
We have to be proactive in seeking research cooperation with universities abroad.
A number of MOUs have been signed by Indian universities with their counterparts in various countries.
It is gladdening to note that Jamia has signed MOUs with institutions in France, Germany, UK, Finland, Canada, Japan and Australia.
A concerted effort is now required to implement these agreements in letter and spirit.
There are novel ideas that could be tapped for greater common benefit.
Out higher academic institutions have to provide a platform where grassroots innovation can be mentored and moulded.
Creative thinking and a spirit of inquisitiveness have to be promoted in our learning institutions.
Scientific temper and analytical rigour have to be cultivated, and plurality in academic approach and autonomy of mind encouraged.
Friends:
The Government has taken important initiatives recently, aimed at financial inclusion, creation of model villages, Clean India and digital infrastructure.
Universities have to be active participants in these programmes and undertake outreach activities for their successful implementation.
More importantly, universities have to produce socially-conscious individuals who are imbued with core values like patriotism, compassion, tolerance, honesty, discipline and respect for women.
I am confident that the students who have earned their degrees today will take part in nation-building in a meaningful way.
I once again compliment all the graduating students.
I also wish the management and faculty of this University the very best.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I am delighted to be amongst you in Vrindavan today.
I congratulate ISKCON for conceiving a unique project of this kind.
I understand that the Vrindavan Chandrodaya Mandir, the foundation stone for which was laid on 16thof March this year, shall be an architectural marvel seeking to recreate the glory and the times of Lord Shri Krishna.
He was instrumental in making Vrindavan the seat of bhakti and in disseminating its principles, as enunciated in our ancient texts, throughout India.
Shri Madhu Pandit Dasa, who has conceived this temple project, has aptly stated that this temple will not be just a mere edifice of concrete and steel, but a living and dynamic institution, and a center of learning and education.
While we as a nation move up the developmental ladder, it is essential that our spiritual core, which forms the bedrock of our civilization, remains undiluted and strong as ever.
It is, therefore, imperative that we reconnect to our spiritual dimensions.
I am particularly happy to learn about the various initiatives that are being contemplated for the upliftment of society under the aegis of this Project, including welfare programmes for the widows of Vrindavan and the restoration, upgradation and rejuvenation of the important sites of Braj.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Civilized societies exist and operate within the framework of these values.
Lord Krishna, through His timeless teachings in the Bhagavad Gita, has shaped the intellectual, cultural and spiritual mindscape of India for several millennia.
It is, thus, only appropriate that Vrindavan strives to become a world renowned center for spiritual enlightenment, from where the message of divinity and peace resonates across all humanity.
I am confident that ISKCON will continue to partner both the Central and the State Governments in their efforts aimed at social change and reformation.
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
I am honoured to deliver the 46thJawaharlal Nehru Memorial Lecture being organized on the occasion of the 125th birth anniversary of Jawaharlal Nehru.
I am grateful to Mrs. Sonia Gandhi, Chairperson and the Trustees of the Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund for this invitation.
It is not easy to do justice to Jawaharlal Nehru's remarkable life as well as his contribution to the making of a modern India in a short lecture.
I shall however strive today to briefly cover some of his views, his actions and the legacy he left behind.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
He was one of the greatest figures of our times.
Nehru had a clear vision of what modern India should look like and he set out to realize his dreams by establishing strong pillars which would support the young nation.
If India is a vibrant democracy today, it is because of the foundations laid by Nehru.
If India has become the third largest economy in the world in terms of Purchasing Power Parity, it is because of the multi-purpose projects, the public sector undertakings and institutions of higher learning established by Nehru as well as the systematic planning process initiated by him.
It is Nehru who brought us from a backward and dependent economy to the emerging power we are today.
It is he who has equipped Indians with the confidence and ability to ensure that our country obtains its rightful and honoured place amongst the leading nations of the world.
Nehru and the Freedom MovementNehru and the Freedom Movement
Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
The end of the First World War saw the unravelling of major empires ruled by the Kaiser, the Caliph and the Tsar.
In India, 1917 saw the Home Rule Movement commence under the leadership of Dr. Annie Besant.
Jawaharlal Nehru, still in his twenties, began his political career as one of the Joint Secretaries of the Home Rule League in Uttar Pradesh with his father Motilal Nehru as President.
Jawaharlal Nehru then plunged into the Non-Cooperation movement launched by Mahatma Gandhi and went to jail in December, 1921.
Thereafter, Nehru continued to be in the front ranks of the freedom movement.
It truly meant a transfer of leadership of the Congress to the younger generation.
Nehru then went on to become President of the Congress in the Lucknow Session of 1936, Faizpur Session in 1937 and many more times.
It was written in flowing hand using rationed war time paper with no cut, blemish or correction.
Nehru was prodigiously productive in terms of writing and thinking during his different periods in jail.
As is well known, Glimpses of World Historywas written by him in 1934, based on 196 letters written to his young daughter, Indira from various prisons.
Nehru and Parliamentary DemocracyNehru and Parliamentary Democracy
Nehru played a central role in shaping the process by which limited representative government given by the British in progressive doses was transformed into vibrant and powerful institutions that suited the genius of the Indian people.
Democracy, for Nehru, meant a responsible and responsive political system governing through consultation and discussion.
Nehru established healthy practices and precedents as Leader of the House in the Provisional Parliament of 1950 and in the First, Second, and Third Lok Sabhas from 1952 to 1964.
He treated Parliament with great respect and sat patiently through long and often tedious debates as an example to his colleagues and young parliamentarians.
Nehru promoted frank discussions on subjects of importance in the Houses of Parliament and did not appreciate the use of public interest as a reason to deny information.
Nehru was aware that the lack of an established Opposition meant significant weakness in the system.
He said:
Most of the time of Parliament Sessions during the first to the third Lok Sabhas were devoted to discussing legislation, budget, Plan and matters related to money and finance.
The volume of financial transactions in those days was very meagre.
In fact, Jawaharlal Nehru once jokingly commented that the budget of the Government of India is less than the budget of the New York Municipal Corporation.
But, this did not prevent Members of Parliament from having full debate on various financial issues, especially the Five Year Plans.
Nehru frequently met Opposition leaders to exchange ideas on crucial issues and asked his Ministers to welcome probing questions and debates.
Nehru took keen interest in the Question Hour and was almost always present during the Hour.
Nehru was attentive to the need to preserve and protect the rights and privileges of members.
He was also particular that the dignity and prestige of the House should be maintained at all times.
Nehru had tremendous faith in the capacity of poor, unlettered people to understand issues and exercise reasoned choices.
He did not use the excuse of the partition of the country and the consequent communal violence or influx of refugees to postpone elections.
He educated the people about the value of adult suffrage and their duty to discharge their right to vote with responsibility.
Nehru and SecularismNehru and Secularism
Nehru was secular to the core.
Nehru and Empowerment of WomenNehru and Empowerment of Women
Nehru was keen that women play their part as equal citizens in the nation.
Unlike in the West, women in India got the right to vote at the same time as men, a goal spelt out by the Congress as early as 1928.
Without them the country cannot make rapid progress.
The aftermath of World War II saw the globe split between two rival power blocs of East and West.
For India, more so for Nehru, who as Prime Minister, held the portfolio of foreign affairs for seventeen long years, staying out of military blocs and alliances was essential to maintaining freedom of action for the nascent Indian state.
It meant independence of judgment and action.
It was not a passive but a pro-active and dynamic policy in which India was strongly committed to the goals of the United Nations and would do its best for peace in the world.
Nehru did not wish to involve India in the conflict which the great powers were waging or become a camp follower of any group.
India sent troops for peace keeping to the Gaza strip and Congo.
India was a tireless campaigner against nuclear weapons and testing in the oceans and the atmosphere.
It played an important role in the conclusion of the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in 1963.
India emerged from colonial rule a mostly agrarian country.
Agriculture had been virtually stagnant for half a century and the average rate of economic growth was less than one percent.
Mahalanobis described the Nehruvian approach to planning as the Middle Way or the Middle Path.
The Mixed Economy and Welfare State emerged thereafter as important concepts.
Nehru also devised the institution of the National Development Council (NDC) to secure national and inter-regional consensus on development programmes.
The Session coincided with the launch of the Second Five Year Plan.
Planning helped allocate scarce resources in accordance with national priorities.
The relative merit of a regulated economy was widely accepted those days.
The private sector continued to play an important role, especially in agriculture and small and medium industries.
In fact, during the early days of independence, even the private sector supported the idea of a key role for government in creating economic growth.
Moreover, many private sector companies received strong support from public sector financial institutions, enabling them turn into domestic giants in their respective fields.
They are the temples of today.
I feel more, if I may use the word, religious-minded when I see these great works than when I see any temple or any place of pure worship.
Nehru and ScienceNehru and Science
Along with scientific achievement, the development of a scientific frame of mind and a scientific habit of thinking was equally important.
Science was not only a search for truth, but also meant for the betterment of man.
A Science Policy was adopted by the Government and scientific laboratories set up across the country.
Indian Institutes of Technology were established to nurture manpower in engineering.
Frontier disciplines such as space and atomic energy came under the personal supervision of the Prime Minster.
ConclusionConclusion
Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Today we tend to take for granted the success of our Parliamentary Democracy.
It must be however kept in mind that in many newly independent nations, first generation nationalist leaders concentrated all power in their own hands and were succeeded by military rulers.
It was Jawaharlal Nehru and other founding fathers who ensured that on gaining independence, power was transferred to the people of India through adoption of the Constitution and regular free and fair elections.
A vast sub-continent is attempting to apply to its tens and thousands of millions a system of free democracy.
It is a brave thing to try to do so.
If it succeeds, its influence on Asia is incalculable for good.
In the words of S Gopal,
But it is his deep democratic spirit and practice of a politics vested in the sovereignty of the people that is his most precious legacy to us.
Every one of our institutions from the independent judiciary and free press to the legislatures and the Election Commission bear the hallmark of Nehru.
Looking ahead, we must renew afresh the imperative of protecting and strengthening our democratic institutions and practices.
Imperfect they may be, but they represent the best way forward for our nation as we forge ahead into the 21stcentury.
Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I conclude this memorial lecture saluting and paying my humble respects to Jawahar, the Jewel of India.
India is what it is today because of Nehru, his vision and his lifetime of dedication to the nation.
Thank you,
Jai Hind.
I welcome all of you to the historic Durbar Hall of Rashtrapati Bhavan.
The National Defence College of India, where senior officers from not only armed forces but also from civil services and friendly foreign countries are imparted domain knowledge, perform the task of development of human resources effectively.
Their skills are honed to elevate them to effectively deal with national security issues.
Senior civil service officers must be conversant with the capabilities, challenges and issues concerning the national security.
Similarly, the officers of the armed forces must get a perspective of the constitutional frame-work under which the political executive and the civil services function.
In this context, there should be synergy and coordination amongst them all to take informed decisions regarding national security.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Every country is guided in its actions by its national interests and objectives.
Power relationships are constantly changing, and unless a nation fully understands and adjusts itself to the changes that are taking place, its own security could be in jeopardy.
Security is an important aspect of international cooperation.
It, therefore, transcends the traditional view that the armed forces of a nation are only concerned with the territorial integrity of a nation and where conflict is involved.
Its role today encompasses economic, energy, food, health, environment amongst many others.
They include the scourge of international terrorism.
The problem has been compounded by non-state actors who are often sponsored, financed and armed by states.
Not only our armed forces, but those of other peace loving nations too should brace themselves to meet this challenge.
Today the dependency is around 70 percent in regard to our capital requirement.
But this high level of dependency is fraught with danger for our armed forces.
The technology denial regimes, and the availability of critical spares and support at crucial moments can pose serious challenges to our security forces.
A well calibrated strategy with primary focus on the development of indigenous military industrial complex should be implemented sooner than later.
In such instances, the Cabinet Committee on Security would take decision on a case-to-case basis.
We have recently enhanced the FDI ceiling in defence from 26 to 49 per cent.
This ceiling would not be an impediment where state-of-the-art technology is involved.
This measure is expected to strengthen the indigenous defence industry.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
National security demands a multi-dimensional, and a systematic and holistic approach.
It calls for intense research across a wide spectrum of subjects.
At the same time, the various subjects should not be studied in isolation.
The emphasis should be on analysis maintaining cross linkages.
It is intimately connected with the economic, industrial and many other aspects in the country and is all encompassing
I have been informed that six streams comprise the curricula of the National Defence College course.
The Socio-Political Study is intended to help you comprehend the main features of the Indian society and polity and to assess issues which have a bearing on national security.
The Economy, Science and Technology Studies have been intended to introduce you to the principles and practices that shape economic trends and the influence of science and technology in attaining self-reliance primarily in fields that have a bearing on security.
The Study on Strategies and Structures for National Security is a synthesis of all that you have learned and experienced during this course.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The role of the armed forces has expanded with the revolution in military affairs and globalization.
It is clear that future conflicts in the complex defence and security ecosystem will require a more integrated multi-state and multi-agency approach.
Preparing military leaders, police officers and civil servants to deal with the security environment of the future will necessarily have to be addressed in a holistic and comprehensive manner.
I am confident that this prestigious Course would enable you to take informed and reasoned decisions regarding security issues.
I once again wish you all success in your future endeavours and hope that you all will bring laurels to National Defence College and the country that you serve.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I congratulate him for winning this coveted award.
They have published more than a thousand books till date, admired by readers across all strata of society.
It is indeed an act of commendable praise and I congratulate them for working for national integration through literary endeavors.
India is a country of many languages and we celebrate our linguistic diversity by creating some magnificent works each year which contribute to our literary heritage.
His poetry presents a collage of meaning, colours and acceptance.
Dr. Singh is a celebrated teacher as well who has taught at JNU, one of the premier institutions of learning in India.
I am delighted that a visionary and a poet like him has had the benefit of countless young minds as a canvas.
I am sure a lot many of his students, having gained from his experience and insights, will contribute in various ways to enriching our national life and heritage.
Thank You.
Jai Hind
Thank you!
These steps have contributed significantly in creating a positive and conducive policy framework for CPSEs.
I believe that our CPSEs have a vital role in making this a reality.
They have, over the years, established excellent manufacturing facilities in various parts of the country.
We have one of the largest markets in the world and there is no dearth of demand for competitively priced, quality products.
We should aim not only at catering to our huge domestic demand but also towards high quality product development and greater access to foreign markets.
For this purpose, latest technology needs to be harnessed, both through suitable industry-academia linkages and by entering into strategic alliances with entities which possess these technologies.
It is also imperative that attention is focused on vendor development and mandatory procurement through small and medium enterprises.
This would not only develop local industry but also boost domestic manufacturing and usher in a culture of entrepreneurship in the country.
I would, in particular, draw your attention on the need to innovate while doing business.
An ever changing and dynamic business scenario throws up newer and complex challenges which call for innovative solutions.
Over the years our CPSEs have developed a certain way of doing business.
I am informed that a distinguished jury has selected the award winners this year after a rigorous exercise.
I congratulate all the award winners and wish them the very best in their future endeavours.
I also encourage others to emulate the example set by those who have won awards today.
Thank You.
Jai Hind.
To begin with, let me compliment ASSOCHAM, one of the frontier industry associations of our country, for organizing this conference on an issue touching a wide spectrum of our society.
Additionally, there is a binding obligation to realize the dreams of the aspirational generation of young Indians.
At this Meet, I anticipate an honest appraisal of issues concerning livelihood security and expect solutions that will guide policy makers.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Without this important pre-requisite, people suffer denial of access from the common amenities of life.
Food, shelter, education and healthcare become restrictive to someone without a stable livelihood.
Therefore, any policy in the socio-economic domain has livelihood provision at its core, whether or not it espouses such an objective explicitly.
In India, the high incidence of poverty of over 60 percent that prevailed six decades ago have come down to below 30 per cent now.
The poor has to be the first claimants, and hence, the focal point of development activity.
To wipe out the curse of poverty, the most potent tool is job creation.
Livelihood security for the rural population, therefore, has to receive strong impetus.
A sound agricultural system is indispensable for attaining a host of objectives like poverty eradication, food adequacy, nutritional security, expansion in rural employment and higher rural incomes.
The occupational security for an incredibly large number of rural households hinges on agriculture.
There are millions of farmers tilling on small and marginal holdings.
Our focus has to be on innovations for low cost technologies, machines and tools to transform subsistence farming into a viable and rewarding profession.
Our challenge has to be in reaching out to the last farmland and equipping them with best practices in cultivation.
Our efforts have to be directed at raising the low level of farm productivity in order to enhance farmer remuneration.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This has resulted in under-employment in agriculture and even disguised employment, a situation of more people being engaged than what is required.
To lift the pressure off the farm sector, more jobs in the non-farm sector are required to be created through a paradigm shift from primary to secondary agriculture.
The food processing sector provides a window, linking industry with agriculture and generating jobs in rural areas and small townships.
Developing this sunrise sector calls for greater investment in infrastructure like cold chains, handling, packaging and transportation.
Similarly, the financial inclusion programme will cover all habitations with banking facilities and provide all households bank accounts, RuPay cards, financial literacy, micro-insurance and unorganized sector pension.
The manufacturing sector has to be invigorated as the potential of this sector as a mass employment generator is immense.
Job creation and capacity building has to complement one another.
The onus is on National Skill Development Corporation and other agencies to impart skills maintaining requisite standards and make available the targeted number of skilled personnel.
Generating interest amongst youth to acquire new skills or upgrade existing skills call for monetary incentives.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Employment generation in the urban sector posits a tough challenge in a scenario of skill gap and urban poverty.
To enable the urban poor to manage the external environment and access resources, financial cooperative structures have to be promoted.
The National Urban Livelihood Mission is playing a crucial role in unleashing the capabilities of the poor to generate sustainable livelihoods.
In India, over 85 percent of the working population or an estimated 400 million people work in the unorganized sector.
The industry can create mechanisms for income opportunities and capacity building under CSR initiatives mandated by the Companies Act of 2013.
I hope that this Summit will discuss issues threadbare and make recommendations in the right perspective.
I once again commend ASSOCHAM for convening this event.
Thank You.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be present for the inauguration of the 27th Conference of Accountants General.
The authority was re-designated four times before the adoption of the Constitution when the term Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India was provided.
The concept is not new.
In the old treatises, ancient texts of administration, particularly Arthashastra, Kautilya prescribed extensive arrangements for accounting and auditing.
He placed high premium on public audit conducted by incorruptible officials.
I am happy to note that during this Conference, the participants will have the opportunity to deliberate on the achievement of this vision.
I also take this opportunity to mention that all CAGs so far, without any exception, have displayed exemplary courage, integrity and excellent performance.
Audit institutions play an enabling role in ushering in good governance in democratic functioning.
Accountability of public servants extends to maintenance of probity in official dealings, compliance with legal obligations and commitment to efficient delivery of public service.
In recent years, there has been a global surge in demand for accountability of those entrusted with governance.
In a parliamentary democracy like ours, the executive is held accountable to the Legislature.
The reports of the CAG submitted to the Legislature play a seminal role in the enforcement of accountability.
The CAG is also the only supreme audit institution with an accounting mandate as well.
The Constitution has placed this institution at a vantage point providing it with insight into performance of different agencies engaged in financial administration of our country.
You scrutinize the allocation and flow of public funds between different implementing authorities.
Thereafter, you evaluate and report on their prompt and effective utilization, disseminate good practices and stimulate course correction through identification of bottlenecks.
The perspective available to you by virtue of auditing multiple governance entities provides valuable inputs for promotion of good governance in the country.
While audit findings are a barometer of good governance, their utility is manifested only when all the stakeholders, particularly the Executive, Legislature and citizens believe in the credibility of these findings and use them for enhancing the quality of governance.
This casts a great responsibility on the public auditor to conduct audit professionally with utmost diligence and independence, and to report in a fair and balanced manner.
Both the public auditor and the audited entity have to recognize that the objective of audit is ultimately to improve the implementation of governance strategies.
Accountability of the Executive stems from the requirement ofrendering of an accountto the Legislature that authorized it to tax and expend.
Here I would like to mention that more time needs to be devoted in Parliament for detailed scrutiny of financial proposals and financial matters.
The Audit report is a valuable input for the authorities empowered to hold a public functionary to account, in making judgments on their level of performance and recommending improvements.
In India, this responsibility is vested with the Public Accounts Committee and Committee on Public Undertakings that act on behalf of the Legislature.
Effective functioning of these legislative committees, and close association between them and the audit authorities are a blueprint of audit effectiveness, and through it, of governance practices.rendering of an account
They are shaped by societal concerns which find expression through legislative enactments and judicial pronouncements.
Judicial verdicts have underscored the paramount role of our audit institution in ensuring parliamentary accountability in use of public resources by any entity, whether in the public or private domain.
The right of CAG to carry out performance audits of government entities and to verify underlying transactions of even private concerns to provide assurance about the State receiving its legitimate share of revenues arising out of the use of public resources is now well established.
This paradigm shift in your audit mandate encourages development of appropriate policies and procedures to govern your audit process.
It calls for substantial capacity development in your Department.
You must proactively engage with the States in their programmes for modernization of government accounts and financial management systems.
Partnerships already initiated by you have to continue to make accounting an effective tool for accountability.
It is not a bounty from the State.
Many States have legislated for prompt delivery of public services.
The institution of CAG can facilitate successful implementation of this legal right by reporting through its compliance audits the achievement of these performance standards by public authorities.
Ladies and Gentlemen
With these words, I conclude.
Jai Hind.
At the outset, let me thank the Acharya Tulsi Janam Shatabdi Samaroh Samiti for the opportunity to receive the first copy of this book.
I also avail of this occasion to compliment all those who contributed or have been associated with this commemorative volume on the great saint, Acharya Tulsi.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
They helped in nourishing Indian culture with fundamental and interminable values.
Acharya Bhikshu was one of those eminent Acharyas.
He stood against the misinterpretation of religious texts and doctrines.
He provided true meaning to the age-old and fundamental strings of spirituality.
The ninth successor of Acharya Bhikshu was Acharya Tulsi.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This made him a scholar of multiple subjects.
Due to his extraordinary talent and vision, he became the successor Acharya at the age of 22.
From then on, he started a journey of exploration of new vistas for human development.aagamasnyaya
He rendered service for more than sixty years, during which he toiled hard for the transformation of the nation by transforming the individual.
Under the banner of Anuvrat Movement, which he led from its beginning in 1936 until his demise in 1997, Acharya Tulsi met writers, politicians, philosophers, poets and spiritual leaders.
He shared his concern for national integration.
He voiced his opinion against social evils like suppression of women, dowry system, torturing of widows, untouchability and veiling of women.
He launched a special campaign for de-addiction.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Acharya Tulsi was an eloquent public speaker.
Through his thought provoking and inspirational discourses, he enlightened the people.
His thoughts and philosophy are contained in more than hundred books written in different languages and in varied styles.
His writing espouses virtues like rationality, practicality, solution-orientation, relevance and harmony.
As recognition of Acharya Tulsi's significant endeavour in bringing individual transformation, social reformation, religious harmony and national integration, he was conferred several honours like Indira Gandhi National Unity Award, Bharat Jyoti, Vak Pati Samman and Hakim Sur Khan Award.
To dedicate his life completely in the service of humanity and spirituality, he renounced his acharya-ship willingly and appointed Acharya Mahapragya as his successor.
Every word inscribed in this book is an article of faith that followers should bear in their hearts for life.
The lives of people in these modern times are both a matter of opportunity and challenge, of stability and turbulence.
I earnestly hope that the messages contained in the Granth will travel far and wide and imbibed by the people.
I wish this expedition all success.
May this journey on foot benefit the masses and people of our country.
It gives me great pleasure to be present here today to release a Commemorative Postage Stamp to pay tribute to the great Srilankan Buddhist revivalist and writer Anagarika Dharmapala.
I congratulate the Department of Posts for taking this initiative of bringing out a Commemorative Postage Stamp on Anagarika Dharmapala.
I hope that this gesture will contribute towards further strengthening the bilateral ties between India and Sri Lanka and bring the two nations closer.
Historically, India and Sri Lanka have remained natural allies.
The relations between the two countries have withstood the test of time and socio-cultural exchanges for centuries have fostered further close cooperation in various fields.
Both the countries have much to learn and imbibe from each other in order to resolve various issues which are the legacies of a protracted period of colonial rule.
I am confident that the relations between the two countries will continue to further strengthen in the coming years to the mutual benefit of our two peoples.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
In this backdrop, it becomes much more imperative to recall the achievements and safeguard for posterity the memories of the great Buddhist thinker and preacher, Anagarika Dharmapala who practically lived and breathed Buddhist ideals and worked till the last to revive Buddhism.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Anagarika Dharmapala, was one of the founding contributors of Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism and was also a pioneer in the revival ofBuddhism in India.
He not only embraced Buddhism but also lent it Sinhalese nationalist character.
He later entered the order of Buddhist monks as Venerable Sri Devamitta Dharmapala and is considered a Bodhisattva in Sri Lanka.
Accordingly, theMaha Bodhi Society atColombowas founded in 1891 and one of its primary aims was the restoration to Buddhist control of theMahabodhi temple atBodh Gaya.
He also concentrated on establishing schools and hospitals in his country.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Jai Hind
Excellencies,
Distinguished guests,
Our bilateral relations have become increasingly multi-faceted and have acquired a substantive content with enhanced trade and investment levels.
There are substantial prospects of cooperation in the field of technology and innovation between both our countries.
We have set up institutional mechanisms to encourage exchange of economic and commercial information, identify possibilities of investments and tie-ups in different areas, disseminate information on the diversification of trade and to acquaint the business community of both countries about commercial opportunities.
The Indo-Finnish Joint Commission is one such forum.
Both countries have also signed an Agreement for cooperation in the field of Information Security.
In spite of the global economic downturn, bilateral trade has seen a substantial increase and has reached approximately US$ 1.5 billion in 2013, which is an encouraging development.
However, I am of the firm opinion, that this does not do justice to the true potential for economic and trade co-operation that exists between our two nations.
We need to explore the untapped areas where opportunities exist.
A large business delegation in specific sectors of interest is accompanying me.
These captains of industry represent the sectors of Financial Services, Ports & Defence, Seafood, Oil & Gas, Energy, Consulting Services, Healthcare, Chemicals, Hydro Products, Aquaculture, Information Technology, Infrastructure, Utilities & Renewable Energy, Manufacturing and Pharmaceuticals.
India has emerged as one of the largest global economies and the resilience of our economy is evident from the fact that the impact of the global financial crisis has been far less severe in India than other countries.
The strong growth performance that marked our economy in the past decade, when we grew at an average rate of 7.6 per cent per year, has generated keen investor interest in India.
Though our GDP growth during the last two years at sub-five per cent was rather subdued, it was still higher than most major economies barring China.
There are now positive signals emanating that suggest a recovery is round the corner.
Our external sector has strengthened; the exchange rate has stabilized; fiscal consolidation measures have improved our fiscal position; price levels have come down; figures from recent months show that the manufacturing sector is in the nascent stages of a comeback; food grains production reached record levels last year to help the agriculture sector grow at a robust 4.7 per cent in 2013-14.
With measures aimed at stimulating greater investor interest, strengthening macro-economic fundamentals and rejuvenating the infrastructure sector, the Indian economy is poised to once again achieve a 7-8 per cent rate of growth.
Presently, our Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) policy is widely seen to be amongst the most liberal in the emerging economies, allowing up to 100% FDI under the automatic route in several of our sectors and activities.
We have also recently enhanced the FDI cap in crucial sectors like insurance and defence manufacturing and permitted 100 per cent FDI in railways infrastructure.
This is expected to act as a further boost for external investors.
I am, therefore, slightly surprised that FDI equity inflows from Finland into India since April, 2000 have only been 288 million US Dollars, representing only 0.13 per cent of the total FDI equity inflows of 228 billion US Dollars into our country during this period.
I am confident that greater B2B interaction would create better awareness of the vast economic opportunities that lie within our economy.
Finnish companies would find it immensely worthwhile to come and invest in a growing economy like ours.
We have renewed our thrust on the manufacturing sector in India.
We remain committed to pursuing our objective of making India a manufacturing hub.
We are well on course to becoming a manufacturing base and an export hub for diverse goods ranging from agricultural products to automobile components to high-end services.
Many of our industrial sectors today are globally competitive and internationally acclaimed for their quality.
The infrastructure sector is a focus area for our economy.
In the next few years, we envisage a spend of a trillion US Dollars on infrastructure.
To facilitate greater investment in infrastructure, we have set up facilities and schemes such as Industrial Corridors, the Industrial Infrastructure Up-gradation Scheme, National Investment and Manufacturing Zones, Industrial clusters and Smart Cities.
Development of infrastructure will not only propel economic growth in our country but shall also enable foreign companies that invest in India to participate in and partake the benefits of our growth.
Both our countries signed the Agreement on Economic Cooperation in 2010, which shows the importance we attach to expanding bilateral co-operation and partnership.
Finland has developed sophisticated technologies in areas such as communications and information technology, energy, shipbuilding, manufacturing, biotechnology, environment, healthcare and infrastructure services.
There is, accordingly, ample scope for collaboration in areas of innovation, clean technologies and waste management, environment, renewable energy and skill development and training.
Government of India is very keen to encourage the companies of both countries to explore opportunities of collaboration in areas hitherto unexplored.
Tourism is another area of immense potential in our bilateral relations.
You would be happy to know that tourists from Finland can obtain visas on arrival at Indian airports.
We now need to focus on fundamental research in science and technology to help us manage better, issues such as managing and mitigating climate change, ensuring food and drinking water security for our people, and finding sustainable energy sources.
I am aware that the Finnish education system is one of the best in the world and scores very highly in international ratings.
India and Finland need to collaborate intensively in the educational sector so as to add to the diversity of our campuses and to build capacity.
I am particularly happy that during this visit several MoUs and Agreements have been formalized between Indian educational and scientific institutions and Finnish universities.
This will hopefully lead to the creation of an ecosystem between our countries which facilitates exchange of students and faculties and also creates ample opportunities for innovation through joint courses and degrees.
India is keen to further invigorate our bilateral engagement under the newly formed government which has chosen infrastructure and manufacturing as two key focus areas.
It is my pleasure to invite Finnish businesses to participate in the 2nd India-Central Europe Business Forum to be held in India in the first quarter of 2015.
Your Excellency, Mr. Sauli Niinisto, President of Finland,
I am grateful for your gracious words.
It is indeed a pleasure and a great honour for me to be here amidst this distinguished gathering in the Land of the Midnight Sun.
I bring to the Government and the friendly people of Finland, warm greetings and goo d wishes of the Government and the people of the Republic of India.
Excellency, at the very outset I would like to thank you for the warm welcome and hospitality accorded to me and to my delegation.
We are delighted to be in Finland.
Excellency, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,
We, in India, know Finland for the beauty of the Laplands and the industrious nature of its citizens.
We see Finland as an advanced society that has smoothly and successfully developed into an efficiently functioning welfare State.
We appreciate the Finnish value system that puts a premium on education and high productivity, encourages the spirit of enquiry and innovation and gives women equality in the true sense of the word.
India attaches great value to its friendship and co-operation with Finland.
The Government and the people of India and Finland have, over the years, developed a close and fruitful relationship of friendship and co-operation.
Though we may be separated by geographical distances, our co-operationhas, in recent years, become increasingly multifaceted, dynamic and significantly rewarding.
However, given the relative size of our economies and the wide convergence of interests in many areas, the present level of trade and investment needs to be substantially enhanced which I have no doubt, it will.
We are grateful to Finland for standing by India on certain issues that we consider to be important and urgent.
Finland has been steadfast in its support of India's consistent and principled stand on the issue of terrorism.
We are grateful for your support for India's rightful claim to Permanent Membership of the United Nations Security Council.
Finland has made tremendous advancements in infrastructure development, communications and information technology, clean energy, shipbuilding, manufacturing, biotechnology, healthcare and services.
We would very much like to enhance our bilateral co-operation in these areas, learn from the successful experience and practices of Finland and join Finland in creating new and innovative products and technology.
I am confident that the agreements that we have signed will open new avenues and many new opportunities for our people to work together for mutual benefit.
The systems that you have put in place to linking research and innovation to industry is amongst the best in the world.
This has helped Finland to develop advanced technology for its own industrial sector as well as for export.
In your Parliamentary Committee for the Future, you have created a unique institutional capacity for guiding Government policy.
Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen,
In India, we remember Finland for the Helsinki Summer Olympics of 1952, where India won a Gold medal in Hockey, our national game, and a bronze medal in Wrestling.
We welcome the interest of the Finnish people in our culture and heritage.
We invite them to visit India.
Finland is one of the countries to whose citizens we are extending the visa on arrival facility.
I have no doubt that in the days and years to come, such linkages will form the bedrock of an ever stronger friendship between our peoples.
Thank you.
Excellencies,
Mrs. Pouskari Chairperson of the City Council,
Mr. Jussi Pajunen, Mayor of Helsinki,
Mr. Tatu Rauhamaki, the Chairman of the City Board and
Distinguished Guests,
I thank you for your kind words.
I consider it a matter of great honour to receive the Medal of Honour of Helsinki.
At the very outset, I would like to thank you for the warm reception accorded to me by the City Council of Helsinki.
My discussions with His Excellency the President and my other meetings with the leadership of Finland have reinforced my confidence that the traditionally warm ties of friendship and co-operation between India and Finland will only intensify and strengthen in the days and years to come - to the mutual benefit of the people of India and Finland.
As I look about me at this vibrant city, and learn about its infrastructure and capacities, I see an ultra-modern, yet environmentally friendly city.
I am delighted to be here in this historic building, the seat of the City's highest decision making body.
I have noted, with great interest, that the Helsinki City Council has a long history, having held its first meeting as far back as 1875.
In giving me this honour, you are honouring the people of India.
Your Excellency, local self government is an area where India and Finland have much in common.
Throughout its ancient history, going back four to five thousand years, India has had a tradition of local self-government.
Villages and cities in India have had elected local bodies to attend to administrative responsibilities and deliver justice.
Ladies and Gentlemen of the City Council, as I address the people of Helsinki through you, I would like to underline the value that India attaches to her friendship with Finland.
Although our peoples are separated by oceans and continents, they have successfully forged links through their shared values.
We are both open societies, we have a shared commitment to democracy, individual freedoms, the Rule of Law and upholding of human rights.
We firmly believe in the principle of harmonious co-existence of peoples in peace and with mutual respect.
We, in India, welcome entrepreneurs from Finland who have set up base and are working in India.
We value their contribution in developing environment-friendly technologies.
This in fact is one of the priorities of our Government and the success of Indo-Finnish collaborations in this field is certainly very promising.
Upgrading their skills for their effective participation in nation building is a high priority for the Government of India.
We look forward to co-operating with Finland in the skills development sector.
During this visit, a number of agreements and MoUs are being signed.
These will link premier academic and scientific institutions in India and Finland in noteworthy collaborations and promote joint work in many areas of shared interest.
There is a lot that we can learn from the experiences, best practices and successful innovations of Finland; our scientists and professionals, too, have much to bring to the table.
Ladies and Gentlemen, we have much to look forward to in our bilateral partnership.
It is evident that the geographical distance from India and the cold weather here have not deterred young professionals from India from living and working amongst you.
I thank the people of Finland for making them feel welcome and comfortable.
With these words, I would like to extend to you and through you, to the friendly people of Helsinki, the warm greetings of the people of India for your continued progress and prosperity.
Madame Chairperson and Distinguished Office bearers of the City Council, I take this opportunity to invite you to visit India.
I once again thank you for presenting me the Medal of Honour of this great city and wish you every success in your endeavours for the citizens of Helsinki.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I invite you to raise a toast
His Majesty the King,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
All of you play a vital role in making the relationship between our countries stronger and more robust.
India and Norway have had traditionally warm and friendly relations based on our shared commitment to multi-party democracy, open societies, rule of law, a vibrant press and an independent judicial system.
Our positions converge on many regional and global issues.
I hope for an early conclusion of the on-going negotiations for a Trade and Investment Agreement between India and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), of which Norway is one of the four member nations.
I am accompanied on this visit by a business delegation comprising captains of industry from sectors like financial services, ports, defence, seafood, oil and gas, energy, healthcare, hydro-power, information technology, manufacturing and pharmaceuticals.
I am certain that they will connect with their Norwegian counterparts to usher mutually beneficial business partnerships.
Due to the continuing global economic slowdown and other factors, our GDP growth rate was subdued at below five per cent during the last two years.
I am, however, happy to share that the green shoots of recovery are clearly visible.
Steps taken towards fiscal consolidation like deregulation of diesel prices have shown positive results.
Our agriculture sector is performing well.
India now ranks second in the world in both wheat and rice production.
A record food grains production of 264.8 million tonnes last year helped the agriculture sector grow at a healthy 4.7 per cent in 2013-14.
India continues to be one of the most preferred destinations for foreign direct investment with FDI inflows into India peaking at 46.6 billion US Dollars in 2011-12.
I am confident that with the revival of global business sentiment we will be able to attract substantial FDI inflows.
India has a growing and aspirational middle class, an increasing per capita income and a young working population all of which present a great opportunity and are of interest to foreign investors.
To further facilitate FDI, we have recently enhanced FDI limits in sectors like insurance and defence manufacturing and allowed 100 per cent FDI in railway infrastructure.
This will further strengthen our position as a credible destination for overseas investors.
I am confident Norwegian industry will make full use of the new investment opportunities that now present themselves in India.
Investments of the Fund in equity and fixed income assets in India are only about 4 billion US Dollars.
We have renewed our thrust on the manufacturing sector in India.
We remain committed to pursuing our objective of making India a manufacturing hub.
We are well on course to becoming a manufacturing base and an export hub for diverse goods ranging from agricultural products to automobile components to high-end services.
Many of our industrial sectors today are globally competitive and internationally acclaimed for their quality.
The infrastructure sector is a focus area for our economy.
Your country is a repository of advanced technology in hydro-electric power and there is tremendous scope for cooperation in this area between our two governments.
India needs to augment her power generation capacity to meet the ever-expanding energy needs of our growing economy.
I am confident that both our countries can work together in this sector for mutual benefit.
India also holds immense promise for Norwegian companies seeking to invest in sectors such as oil and gas, shipping, machinery and clean technologies.
To facilitate greater investment in infrastructure, we have set up facilities and schemes such asIndustrial Corridors, the Industrial Infrastructure Up-gradation Scheme, National Investment and Manufacturing Zones, Industrial clusters and Smart Cities.
Development of infrastructure will not only propel economic growth in our country but shall also enable foreign companies that invest in India to participate in and partake the benefits of our growth.
Many new institutions of higher learning have either been established or are in the process of being set up.
There is in India today immense emphasis on fundamental research in science and technology.
We hope this will help us manage better, issues such as climate change, food and drinking water security and sustainable, clean energy sources.
Collaborations between India and Norway in science and technology and research and innovation need to intensify and focus on these high priority areas.
We also need to create an ecosystem that shall facilitate exchange of students and faculty between our two countries and also nurture innovation and enterprise through joint courses and degrees.
Apart from the governmental agreements, it is heartening to note that an agreement is also being signed between Fish Biotech Private Ltd. (India) and the Akva Group ASA to set up a joint venture fish farming project near Delhi.
I am confident that the dedicated efforts of all stake holders shall redefine and re-invigorate the economic and trade relations between our two great nations.
It is my pleasure to extend an invitation to Norwegian businesses to participate in the 2nd India-Central Europe Business Forum to be held in India in the first quarter of 2015.
Thank You.
Your Majesty, Queen Sonja
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is indeed a privilege to be here on this first State Visit from India to Norway.
I thank Your Majesty for your kind words.
I deeply appreciate the warm welcome and the gracious hospitality accorded to me and to my delegation.
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Your Majesty and the Government and people of Norway as you celebrate the bicentennial of your Constitution.
I take this opportunity to applaud the active role that Norway has played in global efforts aimed at peace and development.
Your Majesty, India attaches great importance to its long standing friendship with Norway.
Though our two nations are geographically distant from each other, we are bound by our common commitment to democratic values and practice.
We are both open, pluralistic societies that are committed to the protection of human rights and the Rule of Law.
We have, over the years, developed mutual trust and goodwill that has brought our people together to achieve our common goals in many sectors.
Our bilateral relations have never been better and we are both desirous of enhancing our co-operation to its full potential.
We, in India, recognise and greatly value the contribution of Your Majesty and the other members of the Royal Family of Norway to the building and strengthening of our excellent relations.
Your Majesty, our countries have similar views on many issues of regional and global concern.
We are grateful for your endorsement of India's rightful claim to Permanent Membership of the United Nations Security Council and for yourproactive efforts that helped India achieve Observer status in the Arctic Council.
Our bilateral co-operation has been no less fruitful.
We have a very rewarding partnership in oil exploration and scientific research and are both keen to expand the scope of our collaborative efforts in earth sciences, bio-technology, clean energy, fishing and healthcare.
I would like to thank the Government of Norway for the assistance and support extended to India in establishing our Polar Research Station in Svalbard.
Your Majesty, you have visited India about three decades ago.
India has progressed and evolved in many ways since then.
Yet there are many areas whereGovernment of India would like to see more development and inclusive growth.
The new Government is taking a number of measures to encourage investments, revive the manufacturing sector in India, promote skill development, develop smart cities and engage closely with all interested partners and investors in India and abroad to make this happen.
I am confident that the bilateral agreements that we have signed will lead to further fruitful engagement in the many fields where India and Norway have obvious complementarities.
With these words, Your Majesties, I thank you once again for your gracious hospitality and invite you to visit India at a time of your convenience.
It would be an honour and privilege to receive you in New Delhi.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I request you to please join me in raising a toast:
Thank you.
Good evening,
Friends,
Urbanisation is sweeping the world.
It has been said that the 19th century was the century of empires; the 20th century was the century of countries and the 21st century will be the century of cities.
During 2008, according to the United Nations, mankind became for the first time in its history a predominantly urban species.
Demographers estimate that three quarters (75%) of the global population could be urban by 2050 with most of the increase coming in the fast growing towns of Asia and Africa.
Urban population recorded an annual growth rate of 2.76 per cent and the 2011 Census reported a dramatic increase in the number of million plus cities from 35 to 52.
At a time when more than fifty percent of the world live in urban areas, it is important that administrators address the ever rising challenges of sanitation, pollution, mobility, civic amenities and public safety in an innovative manner.
Most cities from the developing world are unprepared, both at local and global levels, to face the challenge of urbanization and ensuring equity in the provision of basic infrastructure and amenities.
There is urgent need to strengthen urban governance and local finances in order to meet current demands and the challenges ahead of us.
Also, our cities are having to do more with less and less financial resources.
Urban India today faces a backlog in the provision of basic amenities and infrastructure.
The first challenge for any urban administrator is sanitation.
A clean city is the first and foremost parameter of equity.
A clean environment is the right of every citizen.
Urban administrators must treat cleanliness as a non-negotiable requirement.
They must make a paradigm shift from waste dumping to waste processing.
Garbage must be seen as a resource.
A city which only dumps waste but not processes is not a smart city.
I am happy to learn that the city of Hyderabad has taken right steps in this regard.
This five year Clean India Mission seeks to provide sanitation facilities for all and create a clean urban India in the 4041 statutory towns by 2019, the 150th anniversary of the birth of the father of our nation, Mahatma Gandhi.
Pollution is another huge challenge in cities today.
Apart from creating lung spaces and green cover, we must encourage people to adopt energy efficient technologies.
Green buildings and green zones must be an integral and imperative part of urban planning and citizens must be encouraged to plan their new dwellings accordingly.
Unless we include greenery and conservation in the policy making and planning stage itself, the green deficit will always remain huge and impossible to fulfill.
With an ever increasing population in cities, the need for comprehensive traffic management cannot be over emphasized.
Efficient and affordable urban mobility solutions are a critical component of a smart city.
Mobility and transport are a development issue and not just a regulatory issue.
The Hyderabad Metro is among the best models of public transport available in India.
I hope it will set an example for similar efforts worldwide.
Urban administrators must use technology to provide better amenities to our people.
Since cities are growth engines and time is money, people should not have to waste productive time in accessing basic amenities.
Government to citizen services should be available online with minimal human interface.
In the past decade, India has taken many novel steps in this direction.
As people increasingly depend on the internet for getting their services, entire cities will need to be wi-fi enabled.
As migration into cities grow, housing for all becomes a critical issue.
Creation of satellite townships is another way of addressing this issue.
Several state governments have adopted innovative approaches in creating housing for the poor and there is need for cross-learning from each other.
Friends,
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Government of India proposes to launch a new Urban Development Mission to support states by handholding them in building infrastructure and services in step with the rapid pace of urbanization.
A new mission mode program is being designed to take up these activities for 500 cities of the Nation.
Private sector participation by way of PPP (Public Private Partnerships) methodology will be encouraged.
Another initiative of the Government is to develop 100 Smart cities.
The smart city approach will merge urban Planning, governance, ecology, environment, infrastructure and information technology to ensure that benefits of technology reach every neighbourhood and improves the quality of lives of citizens.
Under this programme sustainable development of heritage centres will be taken up bringing together urban planning, economic growth and heritage conservation in an inclusive and integrated manner with focus on livelihoods, skills, cleanliness, security, accessibility and service delivery.
Friends,
Conferences like Metropolis provides the perfect platform for sharing ideas from different parts of the globe.
I am sure that noble thoughts have flowed in from all directions during this conference.
I hope these thoughts will result in speedy action and better cities in the near future.
I thank all the distinguished dignitaries, experts and delegates from abroad for visiting India and wish them a safe journey back to their homes.
I congratulate Metropolis and the Government of Telengana, especially Chief Minister K. Chandrasekhar Rao and his officers once again for having made this Congress a grand success.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Your Excellency, President Truong Tan Sang,
Distinguished Guests,
I am honoured to be here.
I was profoundly touched by the warmth of the reception accorded to me and to my delegation by the Government and the people of Vietnam.
My visit to Vietnam provides me an opportunity to personally convey the deep commitment of the Government and the people of India to the enduring friendship and co-operation between our two great nations.
Excellency, Vietnam is a country whose people India holds in the highest esteem.
We have great admiration for the unconquerable spirit of the Vietnamese people, for their determination to succeed against all odds and their tenacity and fortitude against even the most powerful adversaries.
Today, the same attributes and national character are driving your economic growth and development.
These have resulted in increased prosperity and better living standards of your people.
This progress is testimony to the inspirational leadership of this country and the perseverance of its people.
Excellency, our two countries have been closely linked, over the centuries, by the mutually beneficial trade and peaceful contacts.
Of these, the most enduring bond that we share is our common heritage of Buddhism.
Even today, the teachings and principles of Lord Buddha are valid and relevant and are embraced by both our societies in our daily life and interactions.
We also share a history of our struggle for independence from colonial rule.
Sure enough, Pandit Nehru gave Ho Chi Minh his solidarity and support.
He was the first foreign leader to visit the Democratic Republic of Vietnam after the liberation of Hanoi.
The enthusiastic public welcome given to Ho Chi Minh on his visit to Delhi in 1958 and Dr. Rajendra Prasad when he visited Vietnam in 1959 reflected the great empathy and friendship between our two peoples.
I invoke the close bonds of these Founding Fathers of our nations as it is their vision and foresight that recognised the great potential of our closeness.
Successive generations of our leaders have nurtured and consolidated it.
Its warmth endures, and I can feel it in the hospitality extended to me today.
Excellency, our nations have now made a transition from the era of post colonial solidarity and entered a new phase of strategic engagement as natural partners.
Our relations have never been better than they are today.
Our Strategic Partnership has blossomed into a robust, mutually rewarding, multi-faceted relationship.
Our co-operation at regional and multilateral fora constitutes one of the strong pillars of this Strategic Partnership.
It has been reinforced by regular exchanges at the highest political level and the institutional mechanisms that we have created.
Today, as we emerge as two of the fastest growing economies in the world, the potential of our joint efforts to enhance our bilateral trade and investment, our collaboration in science and technology, our co-operation in human resource development and, of course, our cultural exchanges, is infinite.
We also have a convergence of views on most regional and international issues.
We are convinced that together we can promote peace, stability and security in this region and the world.
As two developing countries with a stake in the future, we can and should take advantage of our many synergies.
I am confident that our dialogue and partnership will only strengthen in the years to come.
The future presents us with innumerable new opportunities - and, inevitably, some challenges.
In order for us to safeguard our national interests and further our shared goals of peace and prosperity, India and Vietnam must stand together.
India will always remain your reliable and all-weather friend.
Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Please join me in a toast:
Thank you.
Your Excellency, President Truong Tan Sang,
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,
Both our Governments have an abiding commitment to our people-to-people ties.
The establishment of this Study Centre is yet another example of this.
These have, today, evolved into a vibrant and multi-dimensional Strategic Partnership.
Our current dialogue is based on the close understanding and friendship of the founding fathers of our two great nations.
We are engaged in joint initiatives and programmes across a wide range of areas of common interest.
We have no irritants between us.
Our shared perceptions are shaped by the teachings of the Lord Buddha.
These have inculcated in us a deep respect for peace and the harmonious co-existence of all living beings.
On most regional and global issues, we have a convergence of views.
Our Governments collaborate closely in the United Nations, World Trade Organisation and many regional and multilateral fora.
Both our peoples are determined to create a society that is peaceful, prosperous and stable.
With the changing dynamics in the Asia-Pacific, there has been a shift of economic and strategic gravity towards Asia.
We see a growing role and relevance for our partnership in this context.
In our co-operation in the area of defence and security, we are committed to the promotion of peace in our region.
Excellency, I would emphasise the importance of further strengthening our economic linkages.
The potential of our complementarities is tremendous.
There are new opportunities in trade and investment.
There are also significant prospects for building regional supply chains.
We can and must encourage joint ventures between our investors - in India and Vietnam and also in third countries.
These, in turn, will undoubtedly promote growth, employment and efficiencies in both our economies.
Both our Governments have accorded the fullest encouragement, over the years, to strengthening the linkages between our peoples.
Our investors and businessmen, professionals and researchers, technocrats and academicians as well as our Parliamentarians and our youth have successfully been working together.
Our bilateral dialogue seeks to achieve higher levels of their collaboration for our mutual benefit.
I am delighted that direct flights between India and Vietnam are being started later this year and I hope that it will soon be possible to also drive from Hanoi to Kolkata.
The Archaeological Survey of India will be taking up a project for restoration and conservation of the Cham monuments at My Son.
We look forward to opening an Indian cultural centre in Hanoi which will, no doubt, bring different aspects of Indian culture to your beautiful country.
Both of us would like to see an intensification of the exchanges between our universities and institutions.
I am delighted to note that the Ho Chi Minh National Academy for Politics and Public Administration has already evolved a co-operation framework with the prestigious Indian Institute of Management in Bangalore and with the Indian Institute of Public Administration in Delhi.
We must do what we can to stimulate the curiosity of our younger generation in each other.
We must encourage them to connect in a mutually beneficial relationship to sustain the brotherly sentiment that has bonded our societies for generations.
I have no doubt that this Centre will grow into a focal point for academic exchanges that will enrich the bilateral discourse between our peoples.
Thank you.
I am indeed happy to be amidst this august gathering of distinguished dental professionals from over 138 countries, dental industry leaders, academicians and research scholars.
Smile is a universal language, and I am glad to see that you all, who play a vital role in bringing real smiles on the face of billions of people, have come together to deliberate on the critical and emerging issues in the field of oral healthcare and dentistry.
Oral diseases are becoming the leading health problems and attributed mainly to rapidly changing lifestyles, wide-spread use of tobacco and increased consumption of alcohol.
Due to prevalence and incidence, oral diseases pose a major threat to public health.
I compliment FDI for pursuing with the United Nations for recognition of oral diseases as a part of non-communicable diseases such as diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, stroke, chronic respiratory diseases and cancer, on account of their sharing certain common risk factors.
The initiatives of World Health Organization for a public consultation on sugars intake to reduce public health problems like obesity and dental caries, will also create a platform for overall oral healthcare management.
The standards of oral and dental health is challenging in this subcontinent.
Most people are ignorant of the significance of oral health and its impact on general health.
Oral diseases and tooth decay were considered a part of the ageing process and ignored by a large number of people.
I understand that IDA, as the custodian of oral health in the country, has launched several programmes and projects to raise awareness of the need for maintaining oral health and hygiene amongst different segments of the society.
What we need today in India is an Oral Health Revolution similar to the Green Revolution and White Revolution.
I am happy to note that IDA has been in the forefront of this campaign to bring about an Oral Health Revolution in the country along with FDI and its partners.
I am glad that consistent with the global perspectives on Dental Caries, IDA has started a Child Dental Centre with the singular aim of preventing dental decay among children.
The National Oral Health Programme of IDAthat combines preventive measures with emphasis on education to create oral health awareness among the various segments of the population is a laudable initiative.
Globally, oral cancer is one of the major health challenges of the 21st century and India is also facing the major challenge of treatment and prevention of this disease.
Tobacco use is one of the major causes of oral cancer.
Dentists often are the first to detect any pre-cancerous lesions in the mouth.
I am informed that IDA has set up an Oral Cancer Foundation for early detection and treatment of oral cancer along with Tobacco Intervention Initiative for tobacco cessation.
I understand that an Oral Cancer Registry has also been set up to register exclusively oral cancer cases.
The initiatives taken by the IDA gives us the confidence thatthetools devised for early detection of oral cancer and tobacco cessation will make significant contributions to oral healthcare management in the country.the
IDA must work out with the school authorities to reach the maximum number of schools for preventive oral healthcare amongst the school children.
We are witnessing revolutionary changes in dental technology.
Healthcare is under digital transformation and it is redefining virtually every aspect of clinical practice and related business activity.
The consistent breakthroughs in the field of dental science have had their impact on the professional dentists contributing to enhanced quality of treatment.
Advances in dental research are making dentistry a technology-driven discipline.
In this dynamic world, one needs to update oneself by embracing such evolving technologies which will have extensive use in clinical practices.
This congress will equip the participants about the latest technologies and best practices.
Evidence based and minimally invasive dentistry is in focus nowadays.
The growing awareness about diseases among the patients and their expectations bring a challenge before the professional capabilities of healthcare service providers.
To meet these expectations, you need to devise methodology to deliver comfortable and affordable dental care to the community and adopt innovative procedures and technology.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
We have set the target of skilling 500 million people by 2022.
IDA must work out that how the demographic dividend can be utilized by skilling more number of people in the oral healthcare sector with a twin purpose of generating the employment as well as creating access of quality oral healthcare to over 1.2 billion population of this country.
Providing quality and affordable healthcare to the population is a formidable task.
Government over the years has increased the allocation for health sector.
The process of rolling out universal health coverage has also been set in motion.
This emphasis offers a huge business opportunity in India.
I am sure, the mini global dental market on display here, will be of mutual benefit to exhibitor and the relevant stakeholders in India.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am hopeful that the deliberations in this Congress by the mighty minds from across the globe will bring out a model for oral healthcare, which can meet the demands of the individuals and make the oral healthcare truly affordable and accessible.
This Congress provides such a global platform and I am sure you will utilize this opportunity to deliberate on the emerging issues of oral healthcare.
I will eagerly look forward to the recommendations of this Congress.
I wish the Annual World Dental Congress a success and wish all the delegates a pleasant and memorable stay in India.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
India and United Kingdom share a long tradition and history as well as a multifaceted relationship.
Your presence here this evening is an important manifestation of the good will and trust which both countries enjoy.
Our Constitution recognizes, among others, equality, education and life as being fundamental rights of every citizen of India.
To ensure social inclusion in the real sense of the term, a two-pronged strategy has been adopted.
While on one hand, special measures have been taken to move towards an equitable social order, on the other, we have taken a lead in implementing various international declarations and treaties both in letter and spirit.
This outlines specific steps to be taken to ensure full inclusion of persons with disabilities in education, employment and society as well as ways to ensure accessibility through technology and other enabling provisions.
India is also a signatory to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and to other important international treaties such as the recently concluded Marrakesh treaty aimed towards enhancing access to print materials for the visually impaired.
I do hope that during your visit to India, you have had opportunities of learning and experiencing first hand the roadmap of development based on inclusion which India has been following and is committed to traverse.
Towards this end, appropriate application of various technologies can prove to be very effective.
Realizing this, India is rapidly moving towards the broadening of her educational reach and social empowerment by using advance technologies.
Attempts are underway to make the concept of e-classroom a reality in every school of the country.
The call of the world today is more towards putting innovative ideas into effective usage so that all can benefit from those ideas.
Countries which have strengthened their knowledge and educational systems, have achieved much higher levels of development.
Social awareness and sensitization programmes, data sharing and preparation of human resource have been some of the areas where technology has acquired key significance.
When we talk about education and development, there is no denying the fact that the marginalised sections of our society are an important resource and deserve more focused attention.
In fact, for almost 1500 years, from the founding of Takshashila university in 3rd century BC to the collapse of Nalanda university in 12th Century AD, India was a world leader in the field of higher education.
My best wishes to you for all your future endeavours.
Jai Hind!
the significance of the ability to read and write.
It is an opportunity to highlight the learning opportunities that can and should be taken up by those who want to learn these skills.
It is a juncture when all the stakeholders reinforce their commitment to the common goals.
Today, we celebrate the successful endeavours of individuals and organisations and we recognise those who have made an outstanding contribution for spreading adult literacy.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
They empower him and enable him to broaden his horizons and work for his own interest and that of the larger community.
It enables more perceptive and thus more effective exchanges of thoughts and ideas.
These increase understanding and co-operation for achieving the objectives that a society collectively identifies.
Thus it follows that the more literate a society, the greater its overall integration, growth and development.
The plan of action for eradication of illiteracy should, therefore, not only focus on the tangible aspects of literacy but also delve into its intangible and intrinsic aspects.
However our progress in adult literacy has been uneven and wide disparities are still seen.
While States like Kerala, Himachal Pradesh and Mizoram have done reasonably well, many other States are lagging behind.
The Schedule Castes, Schedule Tribes, Minorities and other disadvantaged groups, which constitute a sizeable part of our population, have very much lower rates of literacy.
There is, thus, an urgent need to focus attention on these groups to help them to catch up so that we can move faster towards the national targets.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Gender disparity in literacy is another important challenge.
As we have been told, male and female literacy rates are 80.89 and 64.64 percent respectively.
We need to do much better.
Government of India rightly considers female literacy as a force multiplier for its social development programmes.
In this context, I was glad to note that the National Literacy Mission has enhanced its focus on female literacy.
If the Mission enables the Indian woman to take charge of her life and health and feel more confident in her immediate physical and social environment; if literacy helps her to overcome deprivation, discrimination and injustice, then we can say that an important objective has been achieved.
As I have said before, our objective should be to bring the literacy rate not only at par with the world average but to the levels attained by the leading societies of the world.
It is satisfying to see that since the introduction of this programme, about 2.86 crore learners have been certified as literate and awarded certificates by the National Institute of Open Schooling.
I would expect them to reinforce the efforts of Government and Voluntary Agencies by promoting the adult literacy programmes in their respective spheres of influence.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
We have still miles to go to accomplish what we have set out to achieve.
While the primary focus of Saakshar Bharat remains on imparting of functional literacy to adult non-literates, there is a growing demand for giving access to basic education to the neo-literates emerging from the literacy programmes.
One is meaningful and effective advocacy and, secondly, cooperation and support of society at large, to bring non-literates into the mainstream of literacy.
Adult Education in India has, so far, been primarily the responsibility of Government with a degree of involvement of Voluntary Agencies.
The National Literacy Mission Authority encourages the Corporate and Private sector to join the Government efforts and contribute by bringing in a variety of synergies.
I am happy to learn that this has had a good response.
I have no doubt that these awards will inspire further efforts in the direction of total literacy in India.
I thank the wish the participants in this Programme great success in their endeavours.
Thank you
Jai Hind
I am delighted to be with you today on the occasion of the presentation of the National Award on Teachers Day.
I extend my heartiest congratulations to all the teachers who are receiving the Award for their commendable work and service to the nation.
Today, the 5th of September, is the birth anniversary of the former President of India Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, a great philosopher, thinker, scholar and educationist of the country.
Very many years ago, he had perceptively remarked and I quote,
We are working for a modern democracy built on the values of human dignity and equality.
These are only ideals: we should make them living forces.
The Teachers Day celebration is a mark of our respect and gratitude to the teaching community.
They are, in fact, the foundation on which a strong, vibrant and dynamic India shall be built.
A robust and quality-oriented education system is the force multiplier that shall transform India into one of the leading nations of the world.
We as a nation are now investing substantially in our education system.
Teachers have to keep pace with rapidly changing technologies.
It is vital for teachers to be comfortable in using ICT and to ensure that students get full benefit of ICT and emerge as citizens knowledgeable in the use of the information technology with the aim of pursuing higher education or entering the job market with relevant IT skills.
To take advantage of the reach of the IT, Government has in the recent budget made allocations for setting up virtual classrooms as Communication Linked Interface for Cultivating Knowledge (CLICK) and online courses.
They are the beacons of light who guide and motivate students throughout their academic life and, many a times, even beyond.
India today needs many more competent and willing teachers to dedicate themselves to improving the standard and quality of education being currently imparted.
Teachers have a vital role to play in the process of upgrading the quality of education which is a direct consequence and outcome of the quality of teachers.
In recognition of this stellar role, teachers have since time immemorial been accorded a special place in our society.
They have been called Acharyas in our ancient texts since they transmit the norms of acceptable conduct to our future generations.
Gandhiji recalled his childhood days to illustrate this point.
He was taught Chemistry by two teachers.
The teaching of one was continuous and without explanation; the elucidation of the other was such that Gandhiji wished the class would never end.
The instruction by one was absorbing and by the other insipid.
I am sure all of us have had similar experiences during our student days where we have come face to face with teachers who have provided the necessary spark to light our creative journey.
The difference an outstanding teacher makes to the learning process is central to the spirit of inquiry that needs to be kindled in young minds.
The big challenge that we in India today face is to improve the quality of teaching and learning outcomes in our schools.
The values of truth, tolerance, integrity, secularism and inclusiveness need to be imparted to our children to make the world a safer and better place to live in.
We are aware that our teachers are working under diverse contexts and conditions.
We also know that the working conditions of teachers in many places are sub-optimal.
However, over time there have been substantial improvements in salary scales and in the construction of proper school buildings with toilets and drinking water.
Regular up-gradation programmes for teachers, in-service training and near at hand academic support systems have also been instituted across the length and breadth of our country.
These constitute welcome steps, and are part of an ongoing process, aimed at making the work environment for our teachers positive and encouraging.
Society and the country have high expectations from you.
I am sure you will live up to these expectations in ample measure.
I once again express my deep appreciation and gratitude to all of you, across the length and breadth of the country, who are imparting knowledge and learning to our future generations with dedication and sincerity.
I also take this opportunity to congratulate all the 357 teachers who are being awarded today for their outstanding contribution in the field of education.
I wish them the very best in their future endeavours.
Dr. Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar, was an outstanding leader of our freedom struggle and a staunch crusader for the rights of the down-trodden and backward sections of our society.
He was the principal architect of the Indian Constitution and shall always be remembered for his role in painstakingly drafting our founding document.
Dr. Ambedkar's philosophy and life are a profile of courage and conviction.
He dedicated himself to the pursuit of knowledge overcoming many adversities on account of his caste and poor economic background.
He graduated from Elphinstone College in Mumbai and thereafter was awarded a scholarship to attend Columbia University in New York from where he obtained his Doctorate.
He contributed the idea of setting up of Employment Exchanges in India.
He was almost single handedly responsible for establishing the Central Technical Power Board, the National Power Grid System and the Central Water Irrigation and Navigation Commission.Dr.
A voracious reader Dr. Ambedkar saw education as a tool for the liberation of the socially backward from illiteracy, ignorance and superstition.
He founded the People's Education Society in 1945 with the aim of advancing the educational interests of weaker sections of society.
Dr. Ambedkar was also a crusader for gender equality and fought for equal rights for women in inheritance and marriage.
With tremendous foresight and erudite scholarship, Dr. Ambedkar not only piloted an outstanding draft through the Constituent Assembly but also outlined the philosophy and wisdom behind the various provisions.
Dr. Ambedkar was clear in his mind that he wanted to see a socio-economic and political transformation of India.
He wanted the vast multitude of people of India to enjoy freedom and equality of opportunities.
He wanted to rid India of casteism and communalism and bring education and development to every corner of the country.
He wanted India to emerge as a modern state where liberty, equality and fraternity flourishes and backwardness is wiped out.
Dr. Ambedkar believed in radical change, but he did not want this change to happen through bloodshed.
Dr. Ambedkar saw great potential in using the Indian Constitution as a powerful instrument of socio-economic transformation and with this intention, introduced into the draft Constitution a variety of provisions which would enable full accountability of the Government, checks and balances, protection of fundamental rights, independent institutions and consistent movement towards social democracy.
Dr. Ambedkar explained to the Constituent Assembly in a speech introducing the draft Constitution on November 4, 1948 the pros and cons of the Parliamentary form of Government vis-a-vis the Presidential system.
Unfortunately it has not been possible so far to devise a system which can ensure both in equal degree.
It is done by the Electorate.
In England, where the Parliamentary system prevails, the assessment of responsibility of the Executive is both daily and periodic.
The daily assessment is done by members of Parliament, through questions, Resolutions, No-confidence motions, Adjournment motions and Debates on Addresses.
Periodic assessment is done by the Electorate at the time of the election which may take place every five years or earlier.
The Daily assessment of responsibility, which is not available under the American system, is, it is felt, far more effective than the periodic assessment and far more necessary in a country like India.
Unfortunately it has not been possible so far to devise a system which can ensure both in equal degree.
It is done by the Electorate.
In England, where the Parliamentary system prevails, the assessment of responsibility of the Executive is both daily and periodic.
The daily assessment is done by members of Parliament, through questions, Resolutions, No-confidence motions, Adjournment motions and Debates on Addresses.
Periodic assessment is done by the Electorate at the time of the election which may take place every five years or earlier.
The Daily assessment of responsibility, which is not available under the American system, is, it is felt, far more effective than the periodic assessment and far more necessary in a country like India.
Dr. Ambedkar described how the President under the Constitution will occupy the same position as the King under the English Constitution:
He represents the Nation but does not rule the Nation.
He is the symbol of the nation.
He represents the Nation but does not rule the Nation.
He is the symbol of the nation.
In normal times, it is framed to work as a federal system.
In normal times, it is framed to work as a federal system.
The States would have no right to secede.
He said: UnionFederation
Dr. Ambedkar ensured the inclusion of a well-defined and comprehensive chapter on Fundamental Rights which specifically abolished untouchability, guaranteed equal rights to all citizens and prohibited discrimination of all kinds in social relations.
Dr. Ambedkar believed that protection of minorities and their religion was of paramount importance.
Thus, the Constitution grants each person the freedom of faith, religion and worship and gives the minorities freedom to manage their religious affairs.
Dr. Ambedkar justified such protection on the following grounds:
It is equally wrong for the minorities to perpetuate themselves.
A solution must be found which will serve a double purpose.
It must recognize the existence of the minorities to start with.
It must also be such that it will enable majorities and minorities to merge someday into one.
It is equally wrong for the minorities to perpetuate themselves.
A solution must be found which will serve a double purpose.
It must recognize the existence of the minorities to start with.
It must also be such that it will enable majorities and minorities to merge someday into one.
Dr. Ambedkar played a crucial role in laying down the Directive Principles of State Policy, a unique feature of the Indian Constitution.
These principles mandate that the State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting a just social order.
These principles lay the foundation for a social democracy.
These principles of liberty, equality and fraternity are not to be treated as separate items in a trinity.
Equality without liberty would kill individual initiative.
Without fraternity, liberty and equality would not become a natural course of thing.
It would require a constable to enforce themWe must make our political democracy a social democracy as well.
These principles of liberty, equality and fraternity are not to be treated as separate items in a trinity.
Equality without liberty would kill individual initiative.
Without fraternity, liberty and equality would not become a natural course of thing.
In the exercise of it, he will have to respect these instruments of instructions which are called Directive Principles.
He cannot ignore them.
He may not have to answer for their breach in a Court of Law.
In the exercise of it, he will have to respect these instruments of instructions which are called Directive Principles.
He cannot ignore them.
He may not have to answer for their breach in a Court of Law.
Dr. Ambedkar was firm in his belief that our judiciary must both be independent of the executive and must also be competent in itself.
He did recognise however that tussles between the executive and the judiciary were inevitable, and were in fact necessary to ensure that each acted as a check and balance on the functioning of the other.
He observed:
Nevertheless, his commitment to constitutional methods was unwavering and he advocated a path of informed and reasoned public engagement.
Dr. Ambedkar believed that strong independent institutions constituted the fundamental pillars of a democracy and it is they who would ensure its survival.
He ensured that the Constitution provided for an independent judiciary and that the right to Constitutional Remedies was a fundamental right.
In his words:
Our very first Chief Election Commissioner Shri Sukumar Sen was invited to supervise the elections in Sudan and since then, the services and expertise of our Election Commission has been sought by many countries.
We have also just witnessed the efficiency and independence with which the elections to the 16th Lok Sabha was recently, held despite the enormous diversity of our nation and an electorate size of around 834 million people.
He stated emphatically about the Constitution:
It must be noted in the above regard that in practice our political system has been innovative and flexible.
For example, the Right to Information Act is a unique and powerful instrument created by law to empower people and enable them access information from any department of the Government on any subject advancing thereby openness and transparency.
Similarly, the Supreme Court of India through Public Interest Litigation has enabled the common man access the highest courts of justice by just sending a post card.
High Courts and Supreme Court have also takensuo motu cognizance of violation of fundamental rights and initiated action on their own setting aside the conventional notions of locus standi.
Finally, we witnessed recently the phenomenon of a popular agitation led by Shri Anna Hazare resulting in civil society gaining direct voice in the legislative process hitherto reserved only for elected members of the Parliament and state Legislatures.
A draft Lok Pal bill was finalized through consultation between representatives of civil society and senior members of the Government prior to presentation in Parliament and subsequent adoption as law.
All the above reflect the strength of Indian democracy and the dynamism of the Constitution.suo motu standi
Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
The greatest challenge for our founding fathers was to come up with a viable system of government.
On the economic front, we have made many significant gains, taking a substantial segment of our people from below the poverty line to a level of dignified existence.
India is now the third largest economy in the world terms of PPP.
In last six decades, the poverty ratio has declined from over 60 per cent to less than 30 per cent.
India has become a nation of considerable economic strength, admired for its advanced scientific and technological capabilities, industrial base and its world class human resources.
Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a reality, however that despite all the achievements in which we can take legitimate pride, our democracy continues to face many challenges.
Large number of Indians still live in poverty, deprivation and want.
We must do everything possible to preserve and strengthen our democracy.
We must engage in combined and committed efforts to overcome poverty and prejudice.
We need to be constantly on the guard against divisive forces raising their heads in the country.
We should address with utmost of speed the challenges of malnutrition, ignorance, unemployment and infrastructure.
We must also ensure that untouchability or any form of disability based on caste, creed, religion or sex is not practised in any part of the country.
But this much is certain that if the parties place creed above country, our independence will be put in jeopardy a second time and probably be lost forever.
This eventuality we must all resolutely guard against.
But this much is certain that if the parties place creed above country, our independence will be put in jeopardy a second time and probably be lost forever.
This eventuality we must all resolutely guard against.
Jai Hind.
I am indeed happy to be here today on the occasion of the Bengal Engineering and Science University (BESU) being converted into the first Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology (IIEST).
The Institute shall integrate under-graduate education, post-graduate education and research in engineering and science under the same umbrella conforming, over time, to international standards.
The Institute has made significant advancements in several areas of human endeavour.
In particular, they are actively seeking to address some of the global challenges today in areas as diverse as renewable energy, water technology, medical and environmental sciences.
Some other important areas of engagement are Disaster Management; Clean coal technology; Power Electronics; Remote-sensing and GIS; Space Technology; Biochemical Sensors, Structural Engineering; VLSI and Embedded Systems.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Academic cooperation between institutions must be encouraged.
It is also important that industry and academia operate in tandem and create the right synergies and environment for industrial growth and academic rejuvenation.
I wish the Institute the very best in its future endeavours.
I also take this opportunity to congratulate all the eminent persons who are being felicitated today.
Jai Hind!
Fellow citizens:
On the eve of 67thanniversary of our Independence, I extend warm greetings to you and to all Indians around the world.
I convey my special greetings to members of our armed forces, paramilitary forces and internal security forces.
I also congratulate all our sportspersons, who have participated and won laurels in the recently-concluded Commonwealth Games held at Glasgow.
Friends:
In the 68thyear of freedom, we have reaffirmed the power of our individual and collective liberties by electing through a remarkably peaceful electoral process, a stable government with a clear majority for a single party, after three decades.
This achievement has given us an opportunity to take up the challenge of governance by reforming the policies, practices and systems of governance so that the enormous aspirations of our people can be fulfilled with vision, commitment, integrity, speed and administrativecapability.
India demands creative thinking in governance that enables fast-track development and ensures social harmony.
The nation has to be placed above partisan impulses.
The people come first.
Friends:
This power has to be exercised within the framework of the Constitution through the institutions of state.
With the passage of time and changes in the eco-system, distortions do appear making some institutions dysfunctional.
When one institution does not function in the manner expected of it, phenomenon of overreach sets in.
While some new institutions might become necessary, the real solution lies in re-inventing and restoring the existing ones to serve the purpose of effective government.
It calls for wider involvement of the civil society in the political process.
It calls for deeper engagement of the youth with the institutions of democracy.
It calls for quick dispensation of justice to the people.
It calls for ethical and responsible behaviour from the media.
It calls for cooperation in the exercise of power and assumption of responsibility, by all stakeholders.
It calls for constructive partnership between the state and the citizen.
It calls for taking a responsive administration to the door step of every hut and habitation in the land.
Fellow Citizens:
The focus of our policies now has to move from alleviation of poverty to elimination of poverty.
The difference is not mere semantics: alleviation is a process; elimination is a time-defined objective.
In last six decades, the poverty ratio has declined from over 60 per cent to less than 30 per cent.
Even then, nearly one-third of our population still lives below the poverty line.
Poverty is not a mere statistic.
Poverty has a face, which becomesunbearable when it scars the visage of a child.
The benefits from economic development must percolate down to the poorest of the poor.
Signs of revival are visible.
Our external sector has strengthened.
Fiscal consolidation measures are beginning to show results.
Notwithstanding occasional spurts, inflation has started moderating.
However, food prices still remain a matter of serious concern.
Manufacturing sector is on the rebound.
Fellow Citizens:
It is the bounden duty of our educational institutions to provide quality education and inculcate the core civilizational values of love for motherland; compassion for all; tolerance for pluralism; respect for women; performance of duty; honesty in life; self-restraint in conduct, responsibility in action and discipline in young minds.
By the end of the Twelfth Five Year Plan, we would have achieved a literacy rate of eighty per cent.
Fellow Citizens:
Cleanliness is a markof self-respect.
Yadrishi Bhavana Yasya; Siddhir Bhavati TadrishiAncient travellers like Megasthenes in the 4th Century BC, Fa Hien in the 5thCentury AD andHiuen Tsang in the 7thCentury AD, when they came to India, have written about the efficient administrative systems, with planned settlements and good urban infrastructure.What has gone wrong with us now?
Every road, every path, every office, every home, every hut, every river, every stream, every particle in the air around us can be kept clean, if we but cared just a little.
We must nurture nature, so that nature continues to nurture us.
My fellow citizens:
Intolerance and violence is a betrayal of the letter and spirit of democracy.
Those who believe in the poison drip of inflammatory provocation do not understand India's values or even its presentpolitical impulses.
Indians know that progress, economic or social, is difficult without peace.
This may be the appropriate moment to recall the great Shivaji's letter to Aurangzeb when the latter imposed jizya.
We can least afford to forget this message at a time when an increasingly turbulent international environment has sparked off rising dangers in our region and beyond, some clearly visible, and some crawling out of the debris of unprecedented turmoil.
Across parts of Asia and Africa, attempts are being made by radical militias to redraw the maps of nations to create ageography for theocratic ideology.
India will feel the heat of blowback, particularly as it represents the values that reject extremism in all its manifestations.
India is a beacon of democracy, equilibrium, inter-and-intra faith harmony.
We must defend our secular fabric with vigour.
Our security and foreign policies must combine the steel of strength with the velvet of diplomacy even as we persuade the like-minded as well as the hesitant to recognise the substantial dangers that breed within indifference.
Fellow Citizens:
India has the will, energy, intellect, values and unity to claim the 21stcentury.
The vision to win the battle of freedom from poverty is set; the journey will seemformidable only to those without conviction.
Jai Hind.
Good Evening!
At the very outset, I welcome all of you in Rashtrapati Bhavan.
I would like to congratulate you for joining the Indian Forest Service, one of the premier All India Services.
It speaks of your academic excellence.
By joining the Indian Forest Service, you have taken an important step forward in your professional career.
This is just the beginning and you have a very rewarding and challenging career spanning over 33-35 years in the Government.
Our Civilization has always derived its intellectual and spiritual strength from Forests.
The qualities such as tolerance and assimilation are very unique to our ethos as the Indian civilization has its roots in the forests.
Forests, therefore, are not merely a resource, but they encompass the cultural, spiritual and intellectual heritage of the country.
The Government has entrusted you with responsibility of protecting this greatly valuable heritage.
That is why Environment has emerged as the prime agenda for the 21stCentury, of which forests are an integral part.
Forests, being a potential carbon sink, may be one of the important ways to reduce the increasing green house gases in the atmosphere and consequent threat of global warming.
It is a known fact that Mangrove forests on the coast protect the coastal areas from cyclones and tsunamis; forests on the hill slopes protect the soils and prevent landslides and fresh floods; healthy watersheds having good forest cover insulate areas from the draughts and increase agricultural productivity.
It is imperative for our country to adopt sound practices for forest management to address the local issues as well as the global issues.
I expect you to be sensitive to the needs of this segment of society.
There is no dearth of success models, wherein the forests could be effectively protected with the participation of the communities.
With your experience, knowledge and training at your Academy, you can develop innovative model for participation of the communities for sharing of this natural wealth with the dependent community on the forest and also for conserving the forest itself.
This can be made citizen-friendly through extensive use of technology.
I understand that Ministry is working towards the e-filing system for grant of forest clearance.
This is a good beginning to bring technology in the management of forests.
I would like to see the extensive use of technology in conservation, mapping and governance of the forests in the country.
The challenges before you are complex and the expectations from you will always be very high.
Vast areas of this country need to be afforested.
The various services and goods provided by the forests, such as clean water and air, Biodiversity values, soil and water conservation need to be enhanced.
Satisfying all these requirements is not an easy task and will require not only the skills and knowledge you will learn during the training, but also the use of modern technology to bring about such a change.
Good governance is a mechanism to establish order, pursue social and economic progress and promote welfare of the people.
As developing countries grapple with a multitude of socio-economic objectives, standards of governance have come into sharp focus in recent years.
At the time of Independence, we the people of India chose democracy as the form of government.
Our democratic ideals flow from the Constitution, which reflects our civilizational values.
Fundamental rights are essential to preserve human dignity.
In India, I see good governance as exercise of power, within the framework of the Constitution, for efficient and effective management of our economic and social resources for the well-being of the people, through the institutions of state.
Our Constitution is a living document which has evolved with time and within its spacious provisions accommodated the changing needs of a growing democracy.
It is a constant reminder of our civilizational values, which we at times tend to forget.
We will do well to remind ourselves, at least occasionally, that these values are sacrosanct in the functioning of our democracy.
Friends:
It has to be nurtured by carefully developing institutions of democracy.
Distortions happen when one institution does not function in the manner expected of it leading to overreach by others.
What is required then is strengthening, re-invigorating and re-inventing these institutions to meet the needs of the time.
It calls for wider involvement of the civil society.
It entails free and open participation in the political processes by the people.
It calls for ever-increasing engagement of the youth in the institutions and processes of democracy.
Good governance is critically dependent on pre-requisites like inviolable adherence to rule of law, existence of participatory decision-making structure, responsiveness, transparency, accountability, corruption-free society, equity and inclusiveness.
In short, good governance implies a framework that has well-being of the people as its focal point.
Progressive legislations provide an enabling environment and empower citizens to access entitlements.
Some examples are the right to Information, education, food and employment.
Corruption leads to denial of equitable distribution of benefits.
Complexity and opacity of rules and procedures, discretion in the exercise of power, and weak enforcement of legal provisions are factors contributing to corruption.
While we might need some new institutions to fight corruption, the solution lies not merely in creating more institutions but in strengthening and reforming the existing institutions to deliver results.
Panchayati Raj institutions need financial autonomy and administrative ability.
Reforms in this third tier of governance are necessary for sharing of real power with the people.
One must therefore be conscious of her duties and responsibilities, besides rights.
Intolerance and acrimony in public discourse has to be avoided.
Our country needs constructive partners rather than privilege seekers.
I call upon you to contribute to a healthy democratic society and good governance practices in all spheres of functioning.
Its graduates have made a mark in almost all facets of the legal profession.
They have excelled in litigation, judicial services, teaching, research, social advocacy, international organizations and transactional lawyering.
Consequently, the legal profession today attracts the best and the brightest like medicine and engineering did in the yesteryears.
This is indeed a welcome transformation as the importance of the legal profession in a democratic country cannot be exaggerated.
In any society where the rule of law prevails, the legal profession is regarded a noble profession and some of the most prominent leaders of India have been lawyers.
Our independence struggle sought to wrest from the colonial power, basic rights and democracy in a peaceful and non-violent manner using reason, argument, and moral courage all of which are important tools of a good lawyer.
Friends:
Yet there are many areas that require further strengthening.
Our educational institutions imparting law education have to bridge the gap between theoretical concepts and practical application.
They have to ignite inquiry and encourage curiosity.
Even as law students become more adept in interpreting legislative enactments and reading judicial opinions, they must do so within the liberal framework.
It is important to gradually rework the underlying principles to make administration of justice more representative and responsive to the citizens.
Lawyers are in a unique position to play this transformative role, be it through offering of inputs in the framing of legislations, leading cause-oriented litigations and engaging in social advocacy or research.
It must encourage them to constantly think about how their actions will affect the common man.
Along with proficiency in the traditionally identified skills of legal reasoning, research and writing, students must be encouraged to attach utmost importance to the enduring principles of equality, liberty, fraternity with unflinching support for social justice.
They incorporated several provisions in the Constitution to address the social, economic and political problems of the nation.
Abolition of untouchability, prohibition of hereditary titles and the guarantee of fundamental rights are a few notable examples.
Despite our best efforts, some of these social evils continue to survive.
As keen students of Constitutional Law, I need to hardly emphasize to you that a meaningful study of this subject is possible only if one engages in moral reasoning and debates about the true meaning of these strands.
Friends:
It is my hope that our leading law schools are encouraging their students to not merely learn the content of laws but to also assess their rationale, the consequences of their implementation and constructive suggestions for their reform.
In the interest of ensuring quality education, there is usually a push towards standardization.
Yet, there is need for experiments in higher education.
Very often, it is the willingness on the part of a few to take a leap of faith to introduce changes.
I am happy to learn that NALSAR in the last two years has made conscious efforts to diversify its curriculum by offering more elective courses, giving students greater academic flexibility.
NALSAR is a one-of-its-kind law university in the country which has choice-based credit policy in the true sense.
NALSAR has introduced unique MBA programmes in Court Management and Innovation & Sustainability Management besides offering post-graduate degrees in Aviation and Telecommunication Laws.
The objective of research should be the creation and preservation of knowledge and the evolution of new ideas.
Such efforts require the determined effort of researchers and the sustained support of administrators and governing bodies.
Dear graduating students:
You would soon join different branches of the legal profession like corporate law, judicial services amongst others.
Each of them would be rewarding in their own ways.
But remember, whatever branch of law you may chose, the bedrock of your success should be erected on your unflinching defence of fundamental rights of all, civil liberties and the realization of the rights of the marginalized communities.
Dedicate yourself to the lofty ideals of selfless public service.
Attain the highest standards in terms of professional skills and be daring in your fight against injustice irrespective of the financial reward that you receive.
There are sound reasons to continue pursuing goal that is implicit in the traditional view of professional life.
Both the special privileges incident to membership in the profession and the advantage those privileges give in the necessary task of earning a living is means to a goal that transcends in accumulation of wealth
Yet, while pursuing your professional goals, always keep in mind the values that you have imbibed during the course of your education.
Irrespective of your chosen branch of law, apply these values to them.
Your actions will shape the lives and prospects of those who rely on your professional expertise.
Study the Constitution well.
Understand our political system, its institutions and processes.
Analyze the choices that were made to build the country into what it is today.
Recognize that intelligent choices will need to be made for enabling this country reach its maximum potential and participate and contribute in making these choices.
At the conclusion of your formal education today, you step into a world where you would need to learn more.
Continue learning throughout your professional life and accept new ideas.
I am glad to have the opportunity to share some of my perceptions with this distinguished gathering of experts on jute and allied fibres, researchers, policy makers and entrepreneurs.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Jute is an important agricultural fibre crop in Eastern India.
India is currently the largest producer of raw jute fibres and jute products in the world.
Industrial production of jute goods comprises mainly packaging materials, sacking and hessian, which account for 82 percent of the total production.
Unfortunately, there has been a lack of growth orientation in the jute industry during the last few decades.
Adding to its woes is inadequate availability of machinery for increased productivity and quality assurance; industry apathy for technology absorption and product diversification; and insufficient export promotion and marketing strategy.
Serious attempts have to be made to transform the image of jute products from cheap packaging material to value-added products suitable for diversified end-uses.
The global concern for environment and increasing consumer preference for bio-degradable natural fibre products have opened a window of opportunity for enhanced use of jute.
To realize this potential, technical capabilities have to be boosted through greater investment, technological up-gradation, market promotion and facilitatory government role.
The National Fibre Policy 2010 aims at transforming the jute sector from a traditional labour-intensive industry to a self-reliant modern industry with state-of-the-art technology and wider product range.
The Jute Technology Mission is expected to help the growth of jute-diversified products, especially in the export market.
Improvement in fibre yield, and production of fine fibre with improved strength, colour and luster and devoid of defects that arise on account of faulty retting, will ensure remunerative return to the jute farmers.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
However, steps are required to be taken to cut down its cost of production.
For this, improved machinery has to be developed and measures for energy and waste management adopted.
The manufacturing and quality assurance processes have to be up-graded.
To cope with competition from other packaging materials like lighter synthetic bags, greater diversification is necessary to manufacture jute bags of varied types.
I am aware of some useful product innovations in the manufacture of jute-based shopping bags, footwear and handicrafts for use by the common man.
I am told that the consumer response to these items has been encouraging.
Jute shopping bags having assured quality has been received well in the developed markets of US and Europe.
I look forward to the development of more such jute-diversified products, which are of daily use and good aesthetic value.
I am confident that such products will find a ready market in India and abroad.
A large manufacturing base for these items can be established in the Eastern region as well as in other parts of the country.
It is heartening to note that jute is gradually making in-roads in some areas of Technical Textiles, including geo-textiles and composites.
In the field of construction, geo-textiles have established their merit in combating geo-technical problems.
Jute has to find its rightful place in this growing field.
For that, we must have the technical and manufacturing wherewithal to make varied geo-jute products that can find good market within the country and abroad.
Similarly, I envisage the use of jute in manufacturing composite materials, suitable for specific applications in automobiles and construction, to prove its benefit in terms of cost-performance ratio.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Many natural fibres allied to jute like Ramie, Coir, Sisal, Banana fibre and Pineapple fibre are available in our country.
They all hold immense potential in manufacturing useful products.
What is required is the judicious development of appropriate process technologies.
This will pave the way for economic benefits to accrue to farmers and small entrepreneurs dealing with these fibres.
There is need for sharing of knowledge and experience about different natural fibres and their products.
This International Conference on Natural Fibres, with focus on jute and allied fibres, is a right step forward for an understanding of the potential of these natural fibres.
I am sure this forum will address all concerns to ensure greater use of these eco-fibres.
The coming-together of different stakeholders associated with natural fibres will help identify the scope and strategy for purposeful utilization of our natural fibre resources, including jute.
I am certain that this conference will lead to fruitful discussions, healthy exchange of ideas and concrete action plans for the future.
I also wish them good luck for the future.
Thank you.
It is considered the land of Kaushalya, mother of Lord Ram, and the Tapo-bhumi of Valmiki.
Swami Vivekananda stayed at Raipur for many years during his childhood.
Mahatma Gandhi came to Chhattisgarh to acknowledge the participation of its nationalists in the freedom struggle.
Sant Kabir and Guru Baba Ghasidas, the two saints renowned for their deep spiritual wisdom, have a large following here.
It has a green cover of 41 percent and rich mineral deposits of iron ore, aluminium, bauxite, tin and coal.
After its formation in 2000, Chhattisgarh has emerged as one of the fast developing states.
It holds promise for greater all-round development in the future.
It was formed in 1964, when this State was a part of Madhya Pradesh.
Named after the first Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh, it started functioning with 34 affiliated colleges.
This university introduced the semester system way back in 1968.
It is a matter of great satisfaction that from a humble beginning, it has made tremendous progress to be a proud higher academic repository today.
It is a hallowed place for the churning of knowledge and the moulding of minds.
A university, and its teachers, carries a great responsibility to prepare individuals who are complete in all respects.
I look upon centres of higher learning as the guiding light, not only for students, but for the society as a whole.
They have to instill a belief system that is rooted in our universal wisdom and philosophy.
Having a modern outlook does not imply deviating from the core values and philosophies of the yore.
They have transcended epochs.
You have all along dreamt to see this day.
Now, you have got wings to chase your dreams.
As you leave your alma mater today, be assured that your education has made you capable of enjoying a comfortable life and also prepared you to face the rough weather.
As informed citizens and bright young minds, you must not only be aware of your rights but your duties and responsibilities as well.
Spare a thought for your less endowed brethren who did not have the opportunity to partake in the benefits of education.
You have a duty to work towards their upliftment.
You must harmonize your personal goals and societal commitments.
It is possible to conciliate between the two.
For that, you must be driven by a sense of obligation towards your country.
I am confident that you will make good use of the education you have received here.
Though we can boast of a vast higher education network of over 720 degree-awarding institutions and 37,000 colleges, standards in many of them leave much to be desired.
As per reputed agencies, there is not a single Indian institution amongst the top 200 universities in the world.
Academic cooperation between institutions must be encouraged.
Research must be of a high order and prioritized keeping in mind local issues as well as fields of specialization.
Quality up-gradation of state-level institutions, which account for 96 percent of the higher education capacity, must be accorded high priority.
The Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA) is an important initiative in this direction.
The affiliating universities must guide them to maintain high standards in curricula and evaluation.
Yet, at 18 per cent, it is less than most developed countries, and even Russia, Brazil and China.
Owing to various factors, many bright students in our country are still denied the opportunity to acquire higher education.
Greater affordability and enhanced accessibility is the key.
These will result in greater inclusivity in higher education.
Massive open online courses (MOOCs) help bridge distances to provide education to students located far away from urban centres.
ICT networks like the National Knowledge Network (NKN) facilitates knowledge diffusion through sharing of lectures and course material.
It enables intellectual collaboration by encouraging experts separated by geography to interact.
I am pleased to know that this University is already on NKN since 2010.
I once again wish all of you on this august occasion.
May you all excel in life.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
The Grand Anicut, or the Kallanai dam, built across the Kaveri River by the Chola King, Karikala Chola, in the Second Century AD, is considered the oldest water regulatory structure in the world.
Traditional idol-making at Swamimalai, which developed two thousand years ago, is the basis for investment casting technology, now adopted for advanced gas turbine engines.
Tiruchirappalli is a bustling industrial destination today, marked by the presence of important engineering establishments like Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Ordnance Factory, mechanical workshop of the Indian Railways and number of ancillary industries.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Tracing the origins of the older NITs like yours, one can draw a parallel with the genesis of post-1947 modern industrial India, when steel plants, refineries, dams and heavy engineering industries were being set up.
Most of these NITs were established in rural locations or in green-field industrial sites, with the aim to spur local development.
Your Institute, which was set up alongside BHEL, was one of them.
Such vision brought about a pulsating eco-system of industry and technical institution that fostered close interaction.
The NITs have made remarkable progress over the years.
That their growth since inception is primarily the result of indigenous efforts, without help from foreign institutions, is truly praiseworthy.
I am confident that the students, including those of this institute, will understand their responsibilities well.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Yet, according to prominent international surveys on universities, Indian institutions do not figure in the top two hundred places.
Since September 2012, I have been expressing my worry about our performance and restating in all my interactions with higher educational institutions the need to take the rating process seriously.
It is therefore encouraging to see international rating agencies starting to recognize the quality of our institutes.
Some of our IITs are in the top 50 in civil and electrical engineering.
Five institutions are amongst the top 20 universities amongst BRICS nations.
The number of Indian institutions in the top 100 in Asia has increased to 10 this year from 3 in 2013.
I am confident that our institutes would replicate these initial successes in the overall rankings.
The NITs, in particular your Institute, should take a cue from successful Indian institutions on how to approach the rating system.
Featuring in international rankings has several positive spin-offs, in terms of intangibles like boosting the spirits of students and faculty, to more tangible benefits like better placement for students.
It will enjoin our technical schools to adhere to global benchmarks in quality.
I am hopeful of the suggestions made at the Conference being implemented in a time-bound manner.
To address faculty shortage, vacant faculty positions must be filled up on priority and external talent injected by hiring experts from industry, laboratories and foreign universities on short-term basis.
Academic curricula must have an industry-focus.
Industry interface cell must be set up to establish linkages with the local industry and industry associations.
Academic cooperation is a must for healthy exchange of ideas and expansion of knowledge boundaries.
E-classrooms must be made available for smarter dissemination of lectures and tutorials.
I am told that NIT Tiruchirappalli is working on the concept of virtual campus, which if executed will enable greater access to better quality education.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In this age of globalization, we can derive competitive advantage only from an eco-system that is conducive to new learning, research and innovation.
NITs must work towards promoting scientific temper in their students.
I am glad to learn that this Institute has set up centres of excellence in emerging areas like corrosion and surface engineering, safety, health, energy and environment.
Yet, given the present socio-economic condition of our country, the thrust of research must be to erase backwardness and wipe out deprivation.
Innovations must improve the state of the underserved, who want a positive difference in their lives.
I am happy to note that this Institute has a Centre for Rural Technology aimed at developing modern and cost effective technologies for application in the rural areas.
We must, therefore, develop in our budding engineers an understanding of the society.
I am pleased to know that students of this Institute are being exposed to the world outside through initiatives like Joy of Giving that provide service to orphanages and the needy.
I also wish you all best of luck for the future.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Established in 1939, this institute owes its glory and stature to the vision of the Maharaja of erstwhile Travancore, Balarama Varma; the support rendered by the state government; the hard work of the faculty and staff who have served this college since inception; the unrelenting support of thousands of alumni, and the dedication of the students.
It is a delight to see this Institute spread over an expanse of 80 acres of lush greenery.
With four thousand students on its rolls and three hundred faculty members, CET offers eight under-graduate and 23 post-graduate courses, besides doctoral programmes.
Counted as one of the important engineering institutes in our country, CET has emerged as a shining example of a state government institution achieving national reputation.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We are pursuing a high growth strategy to make India a front-ranking nation in the world.
This requires significant contribution from the knowledge sectors.
One of the crucial academic streams that produce skilled personnel for the economy is engineering.
It is a field of study which is vital for fulfilling our developmental objectives.
Our engineering colleges therefore have a key task to produce highly competent engineers and scientists who can become an asset for the profession and the country.
The annual enrolment in engineering in India tripled during the course of the Eleventh Plan period to 55 lakh at the end of this period.
A number of engineering colleges have been started in recent years and the capacity of existing ones increased.
More institutes have also been envisaged in the coming years.
The acid test before our institutions is to produce a large cadre of scientific and technical manpower without sacrificing standards.
Many meritorious students opt for higher studies abroad.
We have to retain them by offering world-class education in their own country.
Unfortunately, superior quality institutions to meet the expectations of bright students are few.
It is a worrisome indicator that no single engineering institute or a university from India is ranked within the top two hundred universities in the world as per reputed international surveys.
This is in stark contrast to the higher education sector prevalent in ancient times.
Seats of learning like Takshashila, Nalanda, Vikramashila, Valabhi, Somapura and Odantapuri had dominated the world higher education system for about eighteen hundred years beginning Sixth Century BC.
Efficient management took our ancient universities to great heights before they declined by the Thirteenth Century AD.
Today, we languish behind many nations.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Curricular reforms for regular revision and up-gradation of curricula, introduction of choice-based credit system and examination reforms to bring in holistic assessment must take place.
A culture of excellence must be promoted.
One or two departments in which an institute has special capability must be nurtured as Centres of Excellence.
Formal linkage with the Industry must be established to have regular flow of inputs from industry experts on course curricula and research.
Engineering programmes must be periodically evaluated based on industry trends.
Alumni must be associated and their experience and expertise utilized for overall development of the institute.
I am happy to note that the alumni of CET, many of whom are eminent scientists, technocrats and bureaucrats, have a strong network.
It must be leveraged for the benefit of this institute.
Being one of the institutions spearheading engineering education, you have an important role in setting benchmarks.
Expertise in key areas must be developed by associating with other knowledge-generating institutions.
It will bestow significant benefits, in terms of recognition of Indian engineering degrees abroad and better prospects of Indian engineers.
The onus is on our engineering colleges to adhere to the requisite accreditation standards.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
For that, research pursuits must be promoted through institutional support mechanisms.
Research activity of an institute must focus on issues and problems that are peculiar to that region.
Research must also endeavour to find ways of achieving greater efficiency in utilizing existing resources.
In the face of increasing resource constraints, growth will be influenced positively by the velocity of technological developments.
Recognizing this, Governments around the world have made a concerted effort to encourage innovation.
This policy reflects the need to right-size our research and development system.
You must mentor grassroots innovators to develop their ideas into useful products, benefitting the common man.
I am happy to note the facilities being provided by the Technology Business Incubation Centre and the Centre for Engineering Research and Development at CET towards promoting research and encouraging innovation.
I am told that a research park within the CET campus is being set up with the aim to propel breakthroughs in engineering science.
The fact that 30 per cent of students graduating from CET join higher studies and research programmes shows the kind of interest in research that this institute has been able to generate amongst its students.
It is heartening to learn that papers presented in national and international conferences by the faculty of CET have been recognized for their academic excellence.
It has produced wonderful engineers who have done their alma mater and the country proud.
Completion of 75 years is an occasion to reflect on what needs to be done to take the legacy of this institution forward and achieve greater success.
I wish all of you a successful conduct of the events.
I also wish you all the very best for the future.
Thank you.
It was an important centre of commerce during the medieval times, frequented by Arab and European traders.
To restore its rightful place as a centre of growth befitting its legacy, one of the important initiatives was to establish this Central University in 2009.
Flanked by the Western Ghats on one side and the magnificent Malabar Coast on the other, Kasaragod provides a picturesque, tranquil ambience for higher education.
It now has six schools, 17 teaching and research departments, over 600 students and 100 faculty members.
It is commendable that within two years of receiving this permanent site for campus, this institution has succeeded in creating the essential minimum infrastructure to shift five academic departments and the administrative wing.
This University has also set up a centre at Thiruvananthapuram.
I compliment the university authorities for quickly responding to the recommendation for establishing centres at state capitals made at the Conference of Vice Chancellor of central universities held in Rashtrapati Bhavan in 2013.
A classical language centre has been envisaged.
With Malayalam attaining classical status in 2013, I am sure that such a centre will provide a worthy platform for research in various aspects of the local language, literature and culture.
A School of Medicine and Public Health has also been planned.
It is indeed a moment of pride, joy, satisfaction and fulfilment for the students and this entire university community.
I congratulate each one of you who has a share in and is deserving of the success of the students.
Dear Students:
Yet, there are many in this country on the periphery of basic needs.
Success of our nation will lie in mobilizing all the positive forces to fight the scourges of poverty, deprivation and backwardness.
You enjoy a privileged position by virtue of having access to higher education.
This privilege comes with a huge moral responsibility.
While pursuing your individual goals, always keep the bigger picture; the higher calling; the greater good, in mind.
Treat your personal aims and the greater good as one integrated whole, without separating them.
I was a teacher before I came into public life.
I know how gratifying it is to be a part of this noble profession.
Our adage of mata pita guru daivam has always placed the teacher on a pedestal.
The teacher led exemplary lives, worthy of the reverence they received.
India needs such teachers in greater numbers today, who are not only dedicated towards teaching and committed to their students but are also driven by a selfless desire to mould the moral fibre of our society.
Innovative measures like appointing eminent resources on short-term basis from research institutions, industry or from abroad have to be adopted to reduce vacancies without dilution of standards.
Quality of faculty has to be transformed by providing them encouragement to attend seminars and workshops, undertake collaborative research and contribute to research publications.
Friends:
Though our institutions are placed in higher brackets amongst Asian or BRICS nations, or in some specific disciplines, we are yet to convert these micro developments into macro successes.
Modern physical infrastructure like smart classrooms has to be made available.
ICT networks have to be leveraged for sharing of ideas and knowledge, and academic cooperation.
E-content through such networks has to be suitably integrated into the regular curriculum.
A dedicated cell has to be in place to strengthen linkages with the industry.
I am sure alumni of this University will play a fruitful role in its affairs in the times to come.
I would like all the central universities, including yours, and their faculty and students to strive hard to get recognition.
I am hopeful of these awards instilling a spirit of competition as well as cooperation amongst the central universities.
I once again wish all of you on this pleasant occasion.
I also wish you good luck for your endeavours.
Thank you.
It gives me immense pleasure in presenting the Gandhi Peace Prize Award for the year 2013 to Shri Chandi Prasad Bhatt, a life-long Gandhian and devoted and far-sighted modern environmentalist of our time.
The award is an expression of our belief that the ideals that Gandhiji espoused are part of our collective living heritage.
Our deep and abiding commitment to democracy stems from this idea.
We continue to be guided by these ideals; we remain committed to them not because it is our past, but because it is also our future.
Only a person who saw Truth as God could speak of Life itself as a message.
The recipients of this award in the past include President Julius Nyerere, President Nelson Madela, Vaclav Havel, Archbishop Desmond Tutu and Baba Amte among many others.
Ramakrishna Mission and Bhartiya Vidya Bhavan are two organisations that have also been conferred this honour.
Each of these individuals and organisations have through their life and work taken forward the Gandhian ideals of human freedom, compassion for fellow beings and the capacity to be resolutely non-violent and caring in the face of terrible injustice.
Their work exemplifies the universality of the non-violent action as a mode of attaining a just and equitable society.
We have gathered today to confer the Gandhi Peace Prize upon Shri Chandi Prasad Bhatt, whose life has also been his message.
It is a love of Nature and Nature as encompassing entire creation.
Shri Bhatt was born into a family of farmers and priests to the Rudranath Temple in Gopeshwar, Uttarakhand.
Being a hill man, he knew the hardships of his fellow villagers in the backdrop of scarcity of employment, healthcare, lack of infrastructure and education.
As a true Gandhian and member of the Sarvodaya movement, he realized the need of the time.
The aspirations of the people inspired him organize the Dashauli Gram Swarajya Sangh in 1964.
He dedicated himself through the Sangh to improve the lives of villagers, providing employment near their homes in forest-based industries, and fighting against wrong policies through Gandhian non-violent satyagraha.
The Chipko movement started by Shri Bhatt in 1973 followed the same method, that is, of peaceful and non-violent Satyagraha for the redressel of the legitimate rights of the hill people to collect wood and fodder and saving them from natural calamities owing to large scale deforestation.
The Chipko movement was and continues to be a movement of deep love.
Love as enacted in the act of hugging trees.
This action meant embracing Nature in all its diversity, bounty and munificence.
It highlights the unique responsibility of protecting creation that has been placed on human beings.
It is a movement of love against pulverising greed.
Gandhiji, like Poet Tagore had an abiding concern with Nature and the unique placement of human consciousness in this vast and bafflingly intricate relationship.
Gandhiji said he had no use for economics without ethics.
This simple injunction created a moral frame within which human ingenuity has to function.
The limits to human greed have to be defined by inner imperatives and not external constraints.
A capacity that Shri Bhatt acquired and demonstrated through practice.
By placing ethics at the heart of economics, Gandhiji gave us an idea whose significance we have just begun to understand.
This is the idea of Trusteeship, based on the idea of faith which is a unique human capacity.
All of us live by and through trust.
Gandhiji asked us to be Trustees and to have faith in the goodness of our hearts and the hearts of others.
This goodness would enable us to act as Trustees of what is ours and not ours.
To be a Trustee is to see Nature as belonging to all creation and those who are yet to come.
The idea of Trusteeship has been also seen as an idea of re-distributive justice.
Those with wealth and capability for generating wealth use it for the benefit of others and for society at large to whom also this wealth belongs.
Through his work, Shri Bhatt has reminded this nation and the world as a whole that we are responsible for the future as well.
When we act as Trustees, we act non-violently.
Ahimsa is not just a method or an instrument.
It requires recognition of the humanity of others, including the humanity of those we seek to challenge, including the State.
Ahimsa is based on the idea that others are capable of recognising Truth and acting upon it however misguided or even oppressive they might be.
Ahimsa is not just non-injury.
It is an active force that embraces the other, eradicating the differences between I and Thou.
Poet Tagore and Gandhiji were two modern Indians who recognised the force of such Ahimsa, which frees the unjust and the oppressor from the need and desire to perpetuate injustice and suffering to others.
Ahimsa deepens freedom and enlarges its scope to include in its ambit, the other.
Shri Bhatt has not only deepened our understanding of responsibility but also provided an object lesson to the world on the power of Ahimsa.
We in India must always keep in mind that we are the Trustees of the heritage of Mahatma Gandhi.
As Trustees, it is our sacred duty to preserve, protect and disseminate this heritage, which is truly a legacy of all humanity.
The Government of India, through the Ministry of Culture has taken two significant and long lasting initiatives in this regard.
In September last year, the Gandhi Heritage Portal was dedicated to the people of India and the world.
The Gandhi Heritage Portal uses technology to bring to the world message of Gandhiji.
The Ministry of Culture also launched a five year mission called the Gandhi Heritage Sites Mission.
I am certain these initiatives will prepare the ground for us to renew our commitment to Gandhian ideals as we mark two significant events in the coming years.
This would be an occasion for us to celebrate not only Gandhiji but all those Pravasi Bhartiyas, persons of Indian origins who have made significant contributions to their adopted countries as well as mother India.
Shri Bhatt, in honouring you we honour all those countless women and men who became Trustees of the Nature and who through their embrace expanded our Swaraj.
I salute you for your dedicated, tireless and invaluable work for the conservation of the environment.
I also thank you for your immense contribution to our nation and wish you good health as well as long years of continued service to our people.
Thank you.
I am told that CPWD has executed works at the Rann of Kutch, Thar Desert, in high altitude areas of the Himalayas, North Eastern Region and also in Afghanistan.
The projects implemented by it which include green building, city infrastructure, sport facility, educational institution, and residential and office complex are commendable.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Any modern organization operating in this evolving field can ill-afford to ignore the latest developments taking place.
It is incumbent on organizations like CPWD to possess sound technical pre-requisite to launch initiatives in various infrastructure domains.
It is for CPWD to adopt state-of-the-art procedures for maintenance of assets.
It is understandable that old organizations are often burdened with out-dated practices.
The challenge is therefore to become vibrant and enterprising, and respond quickly to the changing external environment.
It should benchmark itself with the best in the world.
It should adopt global best practices to be able to orient itself towards efficiency, cost and quality consciousness and on-time performances.
It should adopt latest management techniques to bring in greater efficiency throughout the system.
It should go for information technology (IT) solutions to attain greater transparency and speed in decision-making.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Last mile connectivity of rural roads, health and educational infrastructure, water supply and sanitation are some areas that immediately come to my mind.
I am sure that the Ministry of Urban Development will provide guidance in this direction.
CPWD should build enough capacity within the organization to use latest technology in implementing green building projects.
At the same time, it should also pay heed to the aesthetics of these new buildings.
I expect CPWD to continue serving the country with renewed dedication and commitment in the years to come.
I once again wish the CPWD family the very best for the future.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Each geographic region - and sub-region even - has its individual style and tradition - that stems from the ancient life-rhythms of its society.
In every case, local materials and resources are used.
They had, a very long time ago, perfected scientific and engineering processes far ahead of their times.
Their creations revealed their sophisticated knowledge and highly developed aesthetic sense.
This sector has contributed substantially to the empowerment of women, the youth and the disabled.
A considerable percentage of weavers and artisans belong to the Scheduled Castes and Tribes and religious minorities.
This sector not only provides low investment income opportunities for families in the rural sector but it also supplements their incomes in off-season of Agriculture.
Vitality in this sector checks migration and helps to keep traditional economic relationships intact.
It is significant that the handlooms sector in India, with 24 lakh handlooms, provides employment to about 44 lakh persons and our handicrafts sector provides employment to about 70 lakh persons.
The Textile Sector provides largest employment opportunities next to Agriculture.
It has been disadvantaged by its inadequate access to credit, dependence on middlemen, inadequate availability of raw material, out-dated technology and limited access to markets.
The products in this sector remain vulnerable to competition from cheaper imports and machine made substitutes.
They had introduced a number of measures to ensure its sustainability including well-conceived initiatives, national-level programmes and supportive legislations.
I would like to emphasise that it is crucially important for us, today, to do all that we can to honour their dream.
We must take concerted and collective steps at multiple levels.
These could include, for example, facilitation of easier access of these sectors to credit from banks and other financial institutions and the promotion of the products of these sectors in domestic and foreign markets.
The abundant availability of unusual raw materials in India - such as bamboo, horn, jute, a pool of skilled artisans and indigenous knowledge has kept our production costs low.
Government is working on more enabling policies in the 12th Five Year Plan.
Many who had left the handloom and handicrafts sector have begun to revert.
This is a good indication that Governmental interventions so far have been effective.
Master-craftsmen and weavers, down the ages, have taken pride in passing on their skill to their succeeding generations.
Gandhiji had, in fact, a very clear view on this and considered handicrafts to be a vital part of education.
I would like to, once again, congratulate the craft persons and weavers who have received awards today.
It is my pleasure to be here today for the annual convocation of Devi Ahilya Vishwavidyalaya, Indore which is being held in its Golden Jubilee year.
I congratulate all the students who have received their degrees and medals today.
Devi Ahilya Vishwavidyalaya established in 1964 as University of Indore, reminds us of the great ruler Devi Ahilyabai Holkar who was a benevolent ruler of Malwa and who commands great respect.
Association of her name with the University places great responsibility on the University to combine its role in higher education with service to society.
It is said that India lives in villages.
The ratio of tribal population to the total population in Madhya Pradesh is about two and a half times of that at the national level.
Furthermore, there are 40 tribal development blocks out of 54 development blocks in the eight districts of Indore division.
This implies that challenges of higher education in Madhya Pradesh are higher than those at the national level.
Adequate interventions in terms of policies, plans and approaches are needed for the education of students drawn from tribal and rural backgrounds, especially to make them globally competent.
I am glad to know that Devi Ahilya University is serving the educational needs of eight tribal dominated districts.
Friends, education separates light and darkness; advancement from backwardness; excellence from mediocrity.
If one investment can truly define a subtle linkage to future progress, it is education.
Countries built on the strength of education and knowledge have achieved development over longer periods of time.
Such countries have exhibited greater adaptive powers to changes in resource endowments.
Education has afforded them the ability to overcome resource constraints and build an economy on a high technological base.
If India has to be one of the front ranking nations in the world, the way ahead is only through a robust education system.
Accordingly, the Government proposes to set up an Education Commission to draft a new education policy.
The last modifications to the National Policy on Education was made in 1992.
The country has witnessed tremendous changes since 1992.
India has a sizeable number of young people, with two-third of the population below 35 years of age.
Their proper grooming is essential as they are our future.
Sadly, enrolment in higher education is below 20 per cent in India.
Recognizing that this is not enough and may drag down the potential of our future generation, rapid strides have been made to expand the higher education infrastructure in recent years.
The Government now proposes to establish institutions of national importance such as IITs and IIMs in all the states.
Yet, if we undertake an honest analysis of the state of higher education in our country today, it is evident that many higher academic institutions lack the quality to produce graduates for the global market.
I have been sharing my concerns about the performance of Indian institutions in world university rankings during my visits to the universities.
We must transform our Universities into world class institutions.
Indian civilization has a long standing knowledge tradition.
In fact, for almost 1500 years, from the founding of Takshashila in 3rd century BC to the collapse of Nalanda in 12th Century AD, India was a world leader in the field of higher education.
Our leadership in fields such as science and technology is incumbent on the level of competence in our scientists, scholars, engineers and doctors.
I am happy to find that our institutions have started to accord due seriousness to the rankings process.
In September last year, the Finance module of IIM, Calcutta was adjudged by a reputed agency as the best amongst business schools offering the Master of Management programme.
I want our institutions to build up on these micro-level successes and achieve a much higher overall ranking.
Friends, faculty is the bedrock of education.
The quality of teachers determines educational standards.
Several measures are required for faculty development.
Vacant teacher positions have to be filled up on priority.
Talented faculty from abroad must be hired to inject new thinking and diversity in academic approach.
Many ills that afflict efficient functioning of our universities stem from the lack of good governance practices.
Governance structures have to promote faster and transparent decision-making.
In this context, the induction of reputed alumni into the governance mechanism could provide the dynamism that our institutions are often in short supply of.
Alumni expertise can also be drafted to review existing courses and introduce new ones.
A concerted effort has to be made to develop a wide-ranging partnership with industry.
An institutional arrangement for industry-academia interface is essential to explore the contours of collaboration like sponsorship of research endowments and chairs, and conduct of internship programmes.
Technology is a knowledge carrier and information disseminator par excellence.
Knowledge networks facilitate intellectual collaboration.
They mitigate physical constraints as well.
Effective use of technology-based media for greater academic exchange is the need of the hour.
The Government intends to promote launching of Massive Open Online Courses, virtual classrooms and also establish a national E-library.
It is now over 80 years since an Indian University produced a Nobel Prize winner.
Dr. Amartya Sen, Dr. S. Chandrashekar, Dr. Hargobind Khorana and Dr. Vekataraman Ramakrishnan were all graduates of Indian Universities but obtained their Nobel Prizes while working in US Universities.
Ladies and Gentlemen, if we have to change the above situation, the neglect of research in our universities must be reversed.
We must adopt multi-disciplinary approaches in our academic system since most research activity requires the meeting of minds from diverse disciplines.
In order for students and parents to make informed choices about institutions and courses, objective quality assurance frameworks are also required.
Assessment and accreditation in higher education, through transparent and informed external review process, are effective means of quality assurance thereby assisting student mobility across institutions, in India and abroad.
Even though accreditation is mandatory in India, a lot remains to be desired in terms of its implementation.
I would also like to mention here that we recently became a member of the Washington Accord, paving the way for India to be included in the global comity of nations and providing opportunities of mobility for our engineering students.
The Government is also in the process of setting up a National Academic Depository (NAD).
This will be a national database of academic qualifications for facilitating online verification of academic awards issued by boards and universities.
This would immensely benefit institutions, students and employers by eliminating the need for persons to approach educational institutions for obtaining authenticated copies or for verification of awards as well as reduce the need for institutions to preserve records related to academic performance of students for long years.
Ladies and Gentlemen, our universities have a duty to create inquisitiveness and promote scientific temper amongst their students.
Wings should be given to the ingenuous ideas of students and grassroots innovators.
Novel ideas that can be nurtured into viable products deserve mentoring by Universities.
An initiative taken in several central universities is the setting up of Innovation Clubs.
Activities of such clubs must be dovetailed with innovation incubators located in IITs and NITs in the region.
Friends, India is on the threshold of new opportunities and higher achievements.
Assuming global leadership by India is no longer a utopian proposition.
You, the educated youth of our country, will build this resurgent new India.
Use the education you have received here to become change-agents in society.
The land on which your university stands has been provided by community.
The nation invests in its universities because students are our future.
Students, in turn, have an important responsibility to fulfil, not just to themselves and their families but also to this country and its people.
A convocation is a red-letter event for any academic institution.
It holds great significance and underlines a genuine milestone in the life of its students, their family and teachers.
It is a day when the fruit of years of hard work and perseverance is recognized and celebrated.
Students, you will leave the hallowed precincts of this university with the armoury of knowledge and strength of character.
Go to the world outside; make a difference; touch and transform the lives of people around you, and create a happier universe.
Thank you.
This Institute today has awarded its first PhD degree along with graduation and post-graduation degrees to its second batch of students.
It is a significant milestone for IISER Bhopal, which is a relatively new seat of higher learning in the educational firmament of our country.
With girls comprising 36 per cent of the student population, it is heartening to see how IISER Bhopal has provided impetus to gender equity in science education and research in the country.
I am also glad to learn about the efforts being made by this Institute to promote scientific temperament amongst people and to reach out to underprivileged sections of the society.
I congratulate all the students who have received their degrees today.
India needs capable and committed graduates, more so now, to keep her firmly engaged with the future.
You have worked very hard, and you deserve it.
But you must not rest on your laurels.
You are entrusted with the hopes and expectations of this nation.
So, use your education to pursue your dreams.
At the same time, serve the country; and what better way to serve, than to help the less fortunate realize their dreams.
Always stay true to the knowledge you have gained and uphold the values that your alma mater has instilled in you.
Dream about the endless possibilities for the future; act on those dreams, and help change the world.
Friends:
The youth of our country is brimming with energy and aspiration.
They have to be imparted quality education and requisite skills to beat competition and meet success.
Way back in September 2012, in the Annual Convocation of IIT Kharagpur, I had expressed my sense of dismay on seeing not a single Indian institution finding a place amongst the top 200 universities in the world in international rankings.
The Ministry of Human Resource Development has taken a lot of interest and initiative in this direction.
It is, therefore, a matter of great satisfaction that reputed international rating agencies, of late, have started to recognize the quality of our institutes.
Five institutions are amongst the top 20 universities in BRICS nations.
The number of Indian institutions in the top 100 in Asia has increased to 10 this year from 3 in 2013.
IIT Guwahati is amongst the top 100 institutes aged 50 years or less.
I am confident that in the overall rankings too, our institutions would soon feature amongst the top 100 or even top 50 in the world.
Teaching must be made a more challenging and gratifying profession to attract bright people.
Faculty development must be continual given the dynamic nature of conceptual understanding in various disciplines.
Greater internationalization of the academic community must be attempted through innovative models of faculty and student exchange, visiting chairs and short-term projects.
The advances in ICT must be employed for intellectual collaboration, sharing of lectures and dispersal of ideas and best practices.
It must draw wider expertise, including industry experts and prominent alumni.
The industry-academia linkages in activities like joint research and commissioning of chairs and endowments must be strengthened through institutional mechanisms.
Friends:
Yet, there is an apparent neglect of scientific research in our education system.
Good education system calls for continuous knowledge creation which can be facilitated only through high quality research.
It is with this vision that IISERs have been established.
They have been envisaged as research centres of the highest calibre in which teaching and education in basic sciences integrate totally with state-of-the-art research.
This amalgamation of science education and research is a novel departure from the higher education model that we follow, where universities are focused mainly on education while laboratories and R&D centres undertake research.
In this context, the effort of IISER Bhopal to conduct frontier research in collaboration with national and international organizations is a welcome step.
They must equip students with sound conceptual understanding and analytical foundation.
I am confident that this Institute will fully live up to the expectation with which it has been established.
Let us dream through the prism of posterity.
I wish you all the very best for the future.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I also compliment the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment for motivating people to work towards making the society addiction free.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Today, the entire world is confronted with this problem in some form or the other.
The society pays a significant cost due to people abusing substances such as drugs and alcohol.
Illicit drug use is a serious concern since it poses significant health challenges.
The younger generation is especially vulnerable to the menace, being easily lured to drugs, be it for excitement, curiosity or drug related risk taking behaviour.
Among other factors, the fast changing social milieu arising out of this social and economic transition, which the country is going through, is contributing to the proliferation of drug abuse.
The vulnerability of modern society plays a catalytic role in promoting the consumption and abuse of narcotic and psychotropic drugs.
Drug overdose may even cause death.
The family faces stigma, isolation and constriction of resources.
It is necessary to encourage individuals and families to seek early assistance for problems related to alcoholism and drug abuse.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Alcoholism and drug abuse is a psycho-social-medical problem requiring a holistic approach.
The aim of the comprehensive treatment programme should not merely be to get the addicted individuals off alcohol or drugs.
Focussed attention on making the addicts productive members of the society by making them drug free, crime free and gainfully employed, is what is required.
In this connection, the importance of skill building and vocational training of drug dependent persons for their effective social and economic reintegration cannot be over emphasised.
Generating continuous and sustained awareness through innovative methods about the harmful effects of drug abuse also assumes critical importance.
This was an expression of its determination to strengthen action and cooperation to achieve the goal of an international society free of drug abuse.
This Act makes stringent provisions for the control of illicit trafficking of drugs and empowers the Government to establish centres for the prevention and treatment of drug addiction.
Since last year, the Government of India has also started conferring National Awards to institutions and individuals who have made outstanding efforts such as awareness generation, research and rehabilitation to address the problem of alcoholism and drug abuse.
The Scheme provides for the involvement of NGOs and Community Based Organizations in this regard.
I hope that these efforts will eventually lead not only in the improvement in public health and reduction of crime but also in the upliftment of the entire social milieu.
With a view to reducing the demand for the consumption of alcohol and dependence producing substances, the thrust should be on preventive education programmes and on reintegration of the addicts into the mainstream of society.
The stress should be on mobilization of community resources and greater community participation.
Apart from this, law enforcement agencies should be sensitized to the needs of victims of substance abuse to enable them to be rehabilitated and reintegrated in the society.
I urge employers to implement an effective alcohol and drug prevention programme at the workplace.
This will also help in increasing their productivity.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I call upon all stakeholders to strive to address the problem in a holistic and sensitive manner.
Let us each contribute to prevent and reduce the damage caused by the problem of alcoholism and drug abuse so that we can move further ahead towards a healthier and happier society.
I once again congratulate the awardees and convey my appreciation to them for their efforts and achievements.
I also commend the efforts of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in this direction and wish them all success in their future endeavours.
Jai Hind.
I am glad to have this opportunity to visit this Institute, which is my first to any of the IISERs.
You have received your training from one of the best emerging institutions of India.
This will have a strong positive impact on your career.
Having chosen a path of your own fascination, pursue it with passion and seriousness.
Be creative.
Think about doing things in a new and efficient way.
At the same time, have this realization that as bright young minds, you are capable of contributing so much towards the welfare of society.
Think about how you can make the world around you a better place.
Act in a manner that always results in greater good for your fellow beings.
Friends:
Its study is central to technological progress.
To prepare our nation to switch to a knowledge-based society, greater emphasis has been laid on science education.
IISERs are a product of this effort to push the country to the frontiers of scientific knowledge.
IISERs have designed themselves as research-led teaching universities.
Education is emerging as a process of collaborative learning and teamwork.
Their focus is on nurturing the culture of science through a learner-centric, inquiry-driven teaching, in contrast to the conventional lecture-based teaching.
I also had the opportunity to know about the science outreach programmes of IISER Pune, which is taking science beyond the campus to enable young people to experience the thrill of science.
I am hopeful that this initiative will ignite the minds of school children and attract them towards science.
Friends:
To meet their scholastic needs and aspirations, new institutions have been created and the capacity of existing ones expanded.
Having said that, necessary steps must be taken to ensure that the institutes particularly the ones recently established like IISERs operate at full capacity.
Scale-up of physical infrastructure must be achieved.
Recently, I had interacted with the Directors of IISERs and the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, to capture their vision.
It is our shared understanding that Indian institutions, in order to attain global reckoning, can ill-afford to teach students anything less than contemporary.
Higher education cannot be rendered on the turf of vintage knowledge.
It must be driven by newer thinking and innovation.
Our institutes must imbibe these attributes while preparing the next generation.
Friends:
Our country led the world in the field of higher education in ancient times.
I do not find any reason why today, we cannot occupy our rightful place in the comity of nations when we have excellent faculty and brilliant students.
Centres of Excellence must be built to nurture the core competence of our institutions in select areas.
Periodic peer review using international benchmarks must be instituted to not only bring international visibility but also understand shortcomings in academic management.
I am happy to note that IISER Pune has already set up an International Expert Committee to review its performance and suggest future directions.
They must identify and initiate new and frontier research, especially in multi-disciplinary areas in energy, environment and health.
They must forge collaborations with reputed international institutions, which they can leverage for international research funding.
They must promote innovation and act as a platform for the flowering of ingenuous ideas in common man.
They must beat their current inertia and establish productive association with the industry through internships and research projects.
They must have a dedicated industry-interface cell that can interact with innovation incubators for monetizing ideas and working towards knowledge transfer.
Friends:
This calls for a governance structure in the higher academic institutions that is flexible, monitorable and transparent.
This will facilitate quick decision-making and enable adequate support for creative pursuits.
IISERs must be geared to train students to pursue rewarding careers in science and technology.
I am delighted to learn about the achievements of IISER Pune in terms of its research publications, scientific collaborations, faculty peer recognitions, research grants and student achievements.
Its inter-disciplinary approach in faculty organization, research and teaching is commendable.
I congratulate everyone at IISER Pune for making this possible.
I also applaud the management for its clear vision.
I am confident that IISER Pune would progress to become a top-ranking institute in the times to come and make a difference to science education and research in our country.
I wish you all success.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Honourable Members
Let me begin by extending warm greetings to my fellow citizens, who participated in large numbers in the recently concluded Lok Sabha elections.
We should never forget that we are here because of them.
Serving them should be our first priority.
I also felicitate the members of the new Lok Sabha.
You have successfully obtained the mandate from the electorate and now you represent their hopes, aspirations and dreams.
I extend a warm welcome to all of you and hope that the sessions ahead with heavy legislative agenda will be productive and useful.
I would like to congratulate the Election Commission of India and the official machinery for conducting these elections successfully.
The unprecedented interest shown by the people of India in the elections is a sign of progressive deepening of our vibrant democracy.
Before I dwell upon the tasks ahead of us, I would like to express my solidarity with the families of all those who lost their lives during the election process.
By successively electing women Speakers, the Lok Sabha has re-affirmed our age-old belief in the importance of women in our society.
Honourable Members
It marks a turning point in the evolution of our democratic polity.
The surge in aspirations and the belief that these could be realized through democratic processes, has been amply reflected in the record 66.4% participation by voters, and a clear verdict in favour of a single political party after a gap of nearly 30 years.
The electorate transcended the boundaries of caste, creed, region and religion to come together and vote decisively in favour of Development through Good Governance.
In my Republic Day speech earlier this year, I had hoped for 2014 to be a year of healing after the fractured and contentious politics of the previous years.
Standing here today, I applaud the wisdom of my fellow citizens for having voted for stability, honesty and development in a resurgent India in which corruption will have no place.
My government will work to fulfill these aspirations; with the involvement of all the 125 crore people of this great country.
We will work together to re-establish the credibility of the institutions of democracy.
In all our actions, we will be guided by the core values of our great civilization.
Honourable Members
Poverty has no religion, hunger has no creed, and despair has no geography.
The greatest challenge before us is to end the curse of poverty in India.
With a firm belief that the first claim on development belongs to the poor; the government will focus its attention on those who need the basic necessities of life most urgently.
There would be an emphasis on improving the supply side of various agro and agro-based products.
My government will take effective steps to prevent hoarding and black marketing.
It will reform the Public Distribution System, incorporating best practices from the States.
My government is committed to improving the quality of life in our villages, through empowered Panchayati Raj institutions.
A substantial part of investment will focus on creating community assets and improving basic infrastructure such as roads, shelter, power and drinking water.
My government will strive to end the rural-urban divide guided by the idea of Rurban; providing urban amenities to rural areas while preserving the ethos of the villages.
In the recent past, our farmers have been under severe stress with hopelessness driving some of them to suicides.
My government is committed to reversing this unfortunate trend.
It will increase investment in agriculture, both public and private, especially in Agri-infrastructure.
Steps will be taken to convert farming into a profitable venture through scientific practices and Agro-technology.
My government will address issues pertaining to pricing and procurement of agricultural produce, crop insurance and post-harvest management.
Productivity of Animal Husbandry will be increased.
My government will incentivize the setting up of food processing industries.
Existing cooperative sector laws will be reviewed to remove anomalies and lacunae.
My government is committed to giving high priority to water security.
Honourable Members
Today it is also a country with the largest population of the youth.
We must equip and nurture our youth with the right kind of education, skill-set and opportunity to reap this demographic dividend.
My government will strive to transition from Youth Development to Youth-led Development.
It will set up Massive Open Online Courses and virtual classrooms.
It will formulate a National Education Policy aimed at meeting the challenges posed by lack of quality, research and innovation in our educational institutions.
We will set up IITs and IIMs in every state.
In order to empower school teachers and students, a national e-library will be established.
With the goal of Skilled India, my government will also launch a National Multi-skill Mission.
It will facilitate development and promotion of Indian sports, particularly rural sports.
Sports will be popularised by making it an integral part of the school curriculum and providing educational incentives.
To achieve this objective, my government will formulate a New Health Policy and roll out a National Health Assurance Mission.
It will promote Yoga and AYUSH.
To address the shortfall of health care professionals, health education and training will be transformed.
AIIMS like institutes will be established in every State in a phased manner.
My Government is committed to see that those belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Other Backward Classes are able to avail emerging opportunities.
The government will especially strengthen measures to spread modern and technical education among minority communities and a National Madarsa Modernization Programme will be initiated.
It will take steps to provide dignity of life to them by facilitating their participation in all walks of life.
Steps will be taken to identify their special needs and to provide institutional care to them.
It is committed to providing 33 per cent reservation to them in the Parliament and State Legislative Assemblies.
It will structure a comprehensive scheme, incorporating best practices from States in this regard.
In the recent past, the country has witnessed some grue some incidents of violence against women.
The government will have a policy of zero tolerance for violence against women, and will strengthen the criminal justice system for its effective implementation.
Honourable Members
But, over the years, the federal spirit has been diluted.
The States and the Centre should function as an organic Team India.
In order to actively engage with the States on national issues, my government will reinvigorate fora like the National Development Council and the Inter-State Council.
The Centre will be an enabler in the rapid progress of States through Cooperative Federalism.
State-specific development models will be developed taking into account the special needs and unique problems of Coastal, Hilly and Desert areas.
My government is committed to addressing the issues relating to development of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.
The issue of infiltration and illegal immigrants in the Northeast region will be tackled on priority and all pending fencing work along the Northeast border will be completed.
Special efforts will be made to ensure that Kashmiri Pandits return to the land of their ancestors with full dignity, security and assured livelihood.
The institution of Lok Pal is important to curb corruption and my government will endeavour to formulate rules in conformity with the Act.
My government will take steps to build the confidence and morale of our bureaucracy; enabling it with the freedom to work, and welcoming innovative ideas.
The government will stress on putting in place transparent systems and timebound delivery of government services.
Government systems and processes will be revisited to make them citizen friendly, corruption free and accountable.
Efforts will be made to eliminate obsolete laws, regulations, administrative structures and practices.
Rationalization and convergence among Ministries, Departments and other arms of the government will be ensured to have focussed delivery.
Digitization of government records will be done for improving accessibility.
IT will be used to drive re-engineering of government processes to improve service delivery and programme implementation.
We will strive to provide Wi-Fi zones in critical public areas in the next five years.
My government will rollout broad band highway to reach every village and make all schools e-enabled in a phased manner.
Technology will be used to prepare our children for a knowledge society.
The National e-governance plan will be expanded to cover every government office from the centre to the Panchayat; to provide a wide variety of services to citizens.
Emerging technologies like Social Media will be used as a tool for; participative governance, directly engaging the people in policy making and administration.
As a first step in this direction, the government has already constituted a SIT to unearth black money stashed abroad.
It will progressively modernize the courts to improve their operational efficiency, and start reform of the criminal justice system to make dispensation of justice simpler, quicker and more effective.
It will initiate a mission mode project for filling vacancies in the judiciary and for doubling the number of courts and judges in the subordinate judiciary in a phased manner.
The government will give special emphasis to the development of Alternate Dispute Resolution mechanisms.
Honourable Members
For two consecutive years, our GDP growth has been less than 5 per cent.
Tax collection has declined.
Inflation continues to be at an unacceptable level.
Thus, putting the Indian economy back on track is paramount for my government.
We will work together to usher our economy into a high growth path, rein in inflation, reignite the investment cycle, accelerate job creation and restore the confidence of the domestic as well as international community in our economy.
It will embark on rationalisation and simplification of the tax regime to make it non-adversarial and conducive to investment, enterprise and growth.
My government will make every effort to introduce the GST while addressing the concerns of States.
Reforms will be undertaken to enhance the ease of doing business.
My government will follow a policy of encouraging investments, including through FDI; which will be allowed in sectors that help create jobs and assets.
Employment opportunities will also be expanded by promoting tourism and agro-based industries.
The government will strengthen the pension and health insurance safety nets for labour force of all categories and would provide them access to modern financial services.
To this end, the government will set up world class investment and industrial regions, particularly along the Dedicated Freight Corridors and Industrial Corridors spanning the country.
My Government will encourage the domestic industry to innovate and collaborate internationally.
The SSI and Handicraft sectors will be encouraged by providing them enhanced technological, marketing and investment support.
Export potential of this sector will be encouraged.
My government will make every effort to improve the working conditions of our weavers in particular.
It will also set up a task force to review and revive our MSME sector.
Honourable Members
The government will chalk out an ambitious infrastructure development programme to be implemented in the next 10 years.
A fast-track, investment friendly and predictable PPP mechanism will be put in place.
Modernization and revamping of Railways is on top of the infrastructure agenda.
My government will launch a Diamond Quadrilateral project of high speed trains.
The country will have a network of freight corridors with specialised Agri-Rail networks for perishable agricultural products.
Investment in railways will be increased using innovative financing methods.
Expansion of railways in Hilly States and Northeast region and modernization of rail safety systems will be prime focus areas.
We will encourage R&D and high level local manufacturing for railway systems.
A fast, time-bound and well monitored programme for execution of the National Highways programme will be initiated, to overcome the stagnancy of the past few years.
Low cost airports will be developed to promote air connectivity to smaller towns.
The government will evolve a model of Port-led development.
My government will facilitate modernization of existing ports on one hand, and development of new world class ports on the other.
Stringing together the Sagar Mala project we will connect the ports with the hinterland through road and rail.
The aim of the government will be to substantially augment electricity generation capacity through judicious mix of conventional and non-conventional sources.
It will expand the national solar mission and connect households and industries with gas-grids.
Reforms in the coal sector will be pursued with urgency for attracting private investment in a transparent manner.
Soon, 50 per cent of our population would be residing in urban areas.
Taking urbanization as an opportunity rather than a challenge, the government will build 100 Cities focussed on specialized domains and equipped with world class amenities.
Integrated infrastructure will be rolled out in model towns to focus on cleanliness and sanitation.
Honourable Members
My government strongly believes that environmental conservation can go hand in hand with development.
To achieve this, environment and forest clearance systems will be made more predictable, transparent and time-bound.
Simultaneously, an effective system will be developed for sound appraisal processes and strict compliance of clearance conditions, especially those relating to rehabilitation of displaced communities and regeneration of forests.
Cleaner fuels will be promoted to bring down pollution levels in our cities.
The government will earnestly take up mitigation works to meet the challenges posed by climate change and will closely work with the global community in this regard.
Conservation of Himalayan ecology will be a priority area for my government.
A National Mission on Himalayas will be launched.
Indian languages are repositories of our rich literature, history, culture, art and other achievements.
The government will initiate a mission mode project to create 50 tourist circuits that are built around specific themes.
With a view to encouraging pilgrimage tourism, a National Mission for beautifying and improving the amenities and infrastructure at pilgrimage centres of all faiths will be launched.
It will encourage and incentivise private sector investments, both domestic and foreign, in science and technology and in high-end research aimed at nurturing innovation.
The government will also establish institutes of Technology for Rural Development and a Central University of Himalayan Studies.
Honourable Members
A policy of zero tolerance towards terrorism, extremism, riots and crime will be pursued.
The States will be assisted for modernizing police infrastructure and equipment to tackle new forms of terrorism including narco terrorism and cyber threats.
A national plan will be chalked out in consultation with the state governments to effectively curb incidents of communal violence and the challenges posed by left wing extremism.
It will encourage domestic industry, including the private sector; to have a larger share in design and production of defence equipment.
We will introduce policies to strengthen technology transfer, including through liberalised FDI in defence production.
We will strengthen defence preparedness by modernising our Armed Forces and addressing the shortage of manpower on priority.
Recognising the importance of coastal security, my government will set up a National Maritime Authority.
The government will build a National War Memorial to honour the gallantry of our soldiers.
One Rank, One Pension scheme will be implemented.
Honourable Members
We will pursue our international engagement based on enlightened national interest, combining the strength of our values with pragmatism, leading to a doctrine of mutually beneficial relationships.
We are grateful to them for accepting the invitation at such a short notice.
Their participation, as also the gracious presence of the Prime Minister of Mauritius; not only added sheen to the ceremony, but also represented a celebration of democracy in the region and convergence of our shared hopes and aspirations.
We will further work together with South Asian leaders to revitalise SAARC as an effective instrument for regional cooperation and as a united voice on global issues.
We emphasize that the future of shared prosperity can only be built on the foundation of stability in the region, which requires sensitivity to security concerns and an end to export of terrorism to neighbours.
We will strive to make progress in the many initiatives that are ongoing with Japan, especially in the field of building modern infrastructure in our country.
Russia remains a privileged and strategic partner and my government will build further on the firm foundations of this relationship.
My government will bring a renewed vigour to our engagement and intensify it in all areas, including trade, investment, science and technology, energy and education.
India also values its broad-based cooperation with Europe.
They have done pioneering work in diverse fields, held the highest public offices and have worked hard to support their localities and families in India.
While they have contributed immensely to their adopted country, they also carry a little flame of India in their hearts that can light up the promise of change in our country.
The next Pravasi Bharatiya Diwas in January 2015 will thus be a special occasion.
Honourable Members
They want to see a vibrant, dynamic and prosperous India.
They want to see a resurgent India regaining the admiration and respect of the international community.
Brimming with hope and expectation, they want quick results.
With three Ds of Democracy, Demography and Demand on our side, India is poised to actualize these aspirations.
We must rise to the occasion to fulfill these great expectations.
In 60 months from now, we should be able to say with confidence and pride that we have done it.
JAI HIND
I am happy to participate in the celebrations to mark completion of 150 years of the life and work of Sir Ashutosh Mookerjee, one of the towering figures Indian education has ever seen - a man of great personality, courage and extra-ordinary administrative ability.
I specially congratulate Justice Chittatosh Mookerjee, the grandson of Sir Ashutosh Mookerjee who is sitting with me on the dais and heads both these institutions.
Munshiji believed that freedom would be meaningless and worthless unless cultural, ethical, and moral values are enshrined in the hearts and minds of our people.
He therefore felt the need to create an institution that could begin to bring about in a small way a tangible change through education.
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan which was started as an institution is now a massive cultural and educational movement.
I am told the Bhavan now has 119 centers in India, 7 centers abroad and 367 constituent institutions, spreading quality, value based education on subjects ranging from Sanskrit and Vedas to Information Technology.
I take this opportunity to congratulate Shri S.G. Mehta, the President of this prestigious institution for the achievements of the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan and his leadership.
Returning to Sir Ashutosh Mookerjee, it is rare to find in one man the combination of such qualities of academic brilliance.
Sir Ashutosh showed an aptitude for mathematics at an early age.
When he was young, he met Pandit Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar who was a major influence on him.
In 1879, at the age of fifteen, he passed the entrance exam of the Calcutta University in which he stood third and received a first grade scholarship.
He began his career as a mathematician, but went on to become an outstanding legal luminary.
He was thus a wonderful example of an interdisciplinary scholar.
In recognition of his brilliance, Sir Ashutosh was offered a job in the Department of Public Instruction.
But, he chose to turn it down and instead complete a degree in Bachelor of Law.
During this time, he also continued publishing scholarly papers on mathematics and physics.
At the age of 24, Ashutosh Mookerjee became a Fellow of the Calcutta University.
Sir Ashutosh was a linguist, steeped in the knowledge of ancient Indian scriptures as well as humanities and science.
He was learned in Pali, French and Russian.
He was further an outstanding lawyer who rose to be Judge of the Calcutta High Court and a brilliant administrator who rose to be the Vice-Chancellor of Calcutta University for five two year terms.
He was responsible for the foundation of the Bengal Technical Institute in 1906 and the College of Science of the Calcutta University in 1914.
Sir Ashutosh Mookerjee was thrice elected president of The Asiatic Society.
The Calcutta Mathematical Society was founded by Sir Ashutosh Mookerjee in 1908.
He served as the President of the Society from 1908 to 1923.
In 1910, he was appointed the President of the Imperial (now National) Library Council and his personal collection of 80,000 books were donated to the National Library, which are arranged there in a separate section.
He was the President of the inaugural session of the Indian Science Congress in 1914.
The Ashutosh College was founded under his stewardship in 1916, when he was Vice-chancellor of University of Calcutta.
Along with Dr. Ziauddin Ahmed, Sir Ashutosh was also appointed member of the 1917-1919 Sadler Commission, presided over by Michael Ernest Sadler, which inquired into the state of Indian education.
Under the guidance of Sir Ashutosh, Calcutta University became a major center of learning and research in the Indian sub-continent encompassing students from Lahore to Rangoon.
Despite resistance from the Viceroy and the British Government who viewed Calcutta University as a cradle of trouble makers, Sir Ashutosh set up several new academic programs in subjects such as comparative literature, anthropology, applied psychology, industrial chemistry, ancient Indian history and culture as well as Islamic culture.
He also instituted post-graduate teaching and research in Bengali, Hindi, Pali and Sanskrit.
Sir Ashutosh was fiercely independent.
Lord Curzon's Education Mission in 1902 identified Universities including the Calcutta University, as centres of sedition where young people formed networks of resistance to colonial domination.
The cause of this was thought to be the unwise granting of autonomy to these universities in the nineteenth century.
Thus in the period of 1905 to 1935, the colonial administration tried to reinstate government control of education, which Sir Ashutosh strongly resisted.
Reflecting his sterling character, he refused the post of Vice Chancellor in 1923 when Lord Lytton tried to impose conditions on his reappointment.
Through determination, zeal, hard work and above all remarkable leadership skills, he raised the University of Calcutta to heights never seen before.
What are the lessons modern day educational institutions and Administrators should learn from Sir Ashutosh?
Friends, Sir Ashutosh strived to raise Calcutta University to the ranks of leading institutions of the world.
Similarly, we must transform our Universities into world class institutions.
Indian civilization has a long standing knowledge tradition.
In fact, for almost 1500 years, from the founding of Takshashila in 3rd century BC to the collapse of Nalanda in 12th Century AD, India was a world leader in the field of higher education.
Sadly, today our universities lag behind the best universities in the world.
None of the Indian institutions figure in the top two hundred ranks according to international surveys.
Our leadership in fields such as science and technology is incumbent on the level of competence in our scientists, academics, engineers and doctors.
Secondly, modern day Indians must learn from Sir Ashutosh the importance of ensuring cross fertilization of ideas through interaction of scholars from across India and abroad.
Our educational institutions should break down the silos in which different disciplines function and strive for a harmonious interchange of thoughts between the humanities, science, languages and other disciplines.
This was the atmosphere which used to prevail in Nalanda and Takshashila in their days of glory.
Thirdly, Sir Ashutosh recognized the importance of research being a Mathematician of substance himself.
Under his patronage Sir CV Raman went on to win the Nobel Prize in Physics, the first for science in Asia.
Currently, research is a neglected domain in our higher education structure.
Successful research programmes offer vast possibilities to make a difference in the lives of people.
A developing country like India has to address the grand challenges of renewable energy, climate change, drinking water and sanitation.
Research in these areas will have spin-offs unimaginable in terms of benefits to the common man.
Our universities have to be the breeding ground for creative pursuits.
They have to be the source of cutting edge innovation and technological developments.
Universities must through their inventions and discoveries lead in the registration of patents for our country.
Fourthly, we must recognize that good faculty is a critical component of our education system.
Such teachers should be encouraged to mentor junior teachers and students.
Sir Ashutosh was instrumental in discovering the talents of Sir CV Raman and Dr. S. Radha Krishnan.
He brought many scholars from European Universities to teach at Calcutta University.
He did not hesitate to go beyond the realms of academics and recruit people like Sir CV Raman who was an employee of the Calcutta Mint.
Sir Ashutosh, thus demonstrated courage of conviction and an ability to take risks - a quality worthy of emulation by our Vice-Chancellors of today.
Fifthly, academic autonomy should be preserved at all costs.
Forget the Government of India.
Do your duty as Senators of the University, as true sons of your Alma Mater.
Lastly, students of Universities should be actively encouraged to have a passion for their alma mater and to contribute actively to its growth and development once they leave the portals of the university.
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, transformative ideas are required to steer our educational institutions from the muddy waters of mediocrity.
Governance structures have to be supportive of innovative ideas and also facilitative of faster decision-making.
The expertise and experience of alumni, who are well-established, can be utilized for effective university management.
Studies have shown how alumni participation in university governance improves academic performance.
Our universities, especially the older ones, should make a definitive move towards engaging alumni in their activities.
Friends, education separates light and darkness; advancement from backwardness; excellence from mediocrity.
If one investment can truly define a subtle linkage to future progress, it is education.
Countries built on the strength of education and knowledge has achieved development over longer periods of time.
Such countries have exhibited greater adaptive powers to changes in resource endowments.
Education has afforded them the ability to overcome resource constraints and build an economy on a high technological base.
If India has to be one of the front ranking nations in the world, the way ahead is only through a robust education system.
Sir Ashutosh Mookerjee, if he had wanted could have become an expert on Asian studies or a great mathematician or a famous jurist.
But, instead he chose to gift the best years of his life to be an Educational Administrator.
He was mighty in battle.
He could have ruled an empire.
India needs today many more such individuals willing to dedicate their lives to improving the quality of education in our country.
I call upon the leaders of our educational institutions to follow in the footsteps of this great son of India.
I thank the organizers for having invited me to deliver this lecture.
Let me offer my humble tribute to this great soul in whose honour I speak today and my best wishes to the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan and the Ashutosh Mookerjee Memorial Institute for all their future endeavours.
Thank You.
Jai Hind.
They have distinguished themselves through their exceptional service and extraordinary dedication in the care of the sick and the infirm.
They have brought credit to a vocation that is chosen by the most selfless and compassionate among us.
In recognizing them, we pay tribute to the entire corps of nursing personnel in India.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It was her insight that guided the reform of nursing and set new parameters and precedence, creating a model that is still followed all over the world.
The nursing profession in India has certainly come a long way since then.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Nursing services and capacity building have expanded considerably since Independence and their roles and responsibilities have multiplied over the years.
The strength of nurses in India is currently 0.8 nurses per 1000 citizens.
This, compared to the world average of 3 nurses per 1000 is quite low.
To come closer to the world average, our healthcare system would need to add about 2 million more nurses to its numbers.
Presently, we are graduating about 180,000 trained nurses annually.
At this rate, it would probably take decades for India to reach the 2 million figure.
Despite this prognosis, there is much that we can do to reform and upgrade our capacities.
Nurses in India can definitively participate in strengthening the current nursing framework in India.
As trainers and system innovators, they can do much to develop better methods and educate the communities in which they live and work.
I would encourage them to involve themselves in reviewing and re-modelling practices, modernising methods and rising to the challenges.
These include opening of nursing colleges, strengthening and upgrading of existing schools of nursing and creating new models for nursing and para-medical education.
They have applied their skills - and strictly followed the highest standards of discipline - to enhance their ability to give the finest quality healthcare.
It is no wonder that they have earned goodwill and admiration all over the world for their efficiency and commitment.
The nation salutes you as it honours you today.
I would like to convey to you the gratitude of the people of India and offer you my best wishes for your good work in the years ahead.
It is a new service to facilitate people and organisations in the country to make payments to one another by use of a payment card instead of cash, cheques, drafts or wire transfer.
I understand that India is one of the few countries in the world to have such a network built domestically to meet the card-based payment system needs of the country.
I congratulate Reserve Bank of India for having envisioned the need for such an indigenously managed service in 2005 and for entrusting this task to the National Payments Corporation soon after its operationalization in 2010.
I am told that it usually takes five to seven years to build a fully functional card payment network.
I am happy that the Corporation could make the RuPay service operational by April 2013.
It is also heartening to note that a few banks have started issuing cards which are accepted internationally through the network of an international partner.
The RuPay Scheme provides flexibility to card issuing banks to issue special purpose cards like Kisan Cards, Milk Procurement Cards, Grain Procurement Cards and Financial Inclusion Cards.
The creativity lies in developing products meeting the special needs of the customers by the issuing banks.
Once the rail roads for card payments are built, the same card can be used at ATMs for cash withdrawal or remittance transactions.
The same card can similarly be used on the internet for bill payment or e-Commerce transactions.
Transactions which are mostly settled today either by way of cash or cheque will progressively make way for card based payment transactions as the economy matures and internet penetration increases.
An indigenous system like RuPay will, hopefully, not only reduce the dependence on cash and cheque modes of settlement but will also make it easier to offer products based on specific requirements of diverse user sets within the country.
The card can also be used at fertilisers/farm equipment shops or for general consumption as stipulated under the Kisan card Scheme.
I compliment National Payments Corporation for enabling the banks to implement the Kisan card Scheme.
Seven million cards issued so far is only a fraction of the potential.
Launch of milk procurement pre-paid card by milk procurement agencies or grain procurement agencies in Punjab are other such variants of the card payment mechanism which only a card payment system developed within the country can appreciate and implement faster.
Thank you
It not only symbolizes public accolade and mass acceptance but also immense prestige befitting the highest governmental recognition in the field of cinema.
My special congratulations go to Gulzaar ji who has been honoured with the Dadasaheb Phalke Award this year.
His contribution to cinema, as a writer, poet and a film maker of rare sensitivity, has been tremendous.
This is indicative of the growth of quality cinema in our country and the importance the Indian film fraternity attaches to National Film Awards.
My compliments to all Members of the distinguished Jury for their commendable though onerous job of selecting Award winners.
This task, I am sure, must be very challenging and daunting.
Our cinema is not only a showcase of the multicultural diversity of our country but is also a tribute to our linguistic richness.
Besides being a strong medium of expression, cinema is a vehicle of influence and persuasion for the youth.
When our children witness scenes depicting violence and bloodshed, it does affect their psyche.
It is incumbent on our film makers to make a concerted effort to distinguish between what clearly is an art form and what is not.
The cinematic content of films should have a desirable impact on the social behaviour of people, especially the new generation.
Our film makers should deploy their creative efforts to present and propagate core values such as patriotism, respect for women, compassion and tolerance, and honesty and discipline.
I am hopeful that everyone associated with the film industry will use their talent, creativity and artistic pursuits to create meaningful and socially relevant cinema.
Friends:
It is poised to leapfrog into a completely digital landscape.
Documentaries provide an opportunity to address contemporary social subjects, many of which have been long swept under the carpet on account of the discomforting questions they raise.
I am happy to note that the Government is contributing towards strengthening the documentary movement in the country by holding an International Film Festival of documentaries every two years.
Friends:
Many important political leaders have emerged from the film industry in our country and cinema has played a critical role in highlighting social and political issues of concern as well as exposing the deficiencies in our political system.
It is an industry which has provided opportunities for many to rise from rag to riches.
JAI HIND
I take this opportunity to recall that as the then Finance Minister, I had approved the Action Plan that India submitted to FATF, which then led to India becoming a member of this inter-governmental organization.
I also had the privilege of introducing in Parliament the Amendment Bill 2011 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), through which, our nation strengthened the money laundering legislation, in line with the Recommendations of FATF.
Money laundering is a global menace, and law enforcement agencies all over the world have to cooperate to fight it.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Such measures also foster a more business friendly setting and facilitate legitimate investments and financial flows.
India too has put in place a strong Anti Money Laundering legislation, the Prevention of Money Laundering Act.
In some cases, the Directorate has succeeded in tracing and restraining the laundered proceeds in jurisdictions outside our territory limit.
These attachments of laundered proceeds of crime have bolstered public confidence in them.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The Directorate should intensify its efforts at actively engaging with money laundering investigation agencies of other countries.
Our officers must learn from best investigative techniques of other countries.
The Directorate should aim to work out modalities with international partners so that action with regard to restoration of stolen assets spirited abroad is expedited.
I have also seen from media reports that the assets range from cash and bank accounts to vehicles, land, residential and office buildings, and industrial units.
These assets will finally vest to the Government only after the due legal process is completed.
During this period, Directorate should concentrate on working out and implementing protocols for safeguarding these assets, while the legal processes for their confiscation continue.
Money can nowadays move very quickly across national borders.
To stay ahead of the curve, the Directorate should develop expertise in financial investigations and detection of cross border flows.
The Directorate should also look at adopting state of the art technology in relevant areas such as communications, technical infrastructure and computer forensics.
In 2011, the organizational strength of the Directorate was enhanced almost three times from 745 to 2,064 to expand its capacity for investigation.
The working environment in the Directorate should be such as to encourage the best to join and work.
The Enforcement officials should perform their duty with utmost efficiency and integrity which I am happy most of them are doing.
They should be appropriately motivated and incentivized.
I take this opportunity to congratulate the officials of the Directorate who have been commended today for their distinguished and meritorious services.
I am confident that the awardees will serve as role models for many others in the organization, and motivate them to maintain high standards of professionalism and to discharge their duties with honesty and integrity without fear or favour.
I call upon all its personnel not to be content with its achievements so far, but to aim higher and benchmark its processes and actions with international best practices.
With these words, I thank you once again and wish you all success in your future endeavours.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Through its curriculum, it has fostered the composite culture of India.
Its programmes and policies have always aimed at encouraging the spirit of humanism, tolerance and enquiry.
I call upon its torchbearers to continue developing this University with conviction, industry and determination.
Dear Students:
I also congratulate Shri Rishang Keishing, who has been conferred the Doctor of Law; and Shri L. Birendrakumar Singh, who has been conferred the Doctor of Literature.
It holds great significance and underlines a genuine milestone in the life of its students and even teachers.
It is a day when the fruit of years of hard work and perseverance is acknowledged.
You will leave the hallowed precincts of this university with the armoury of knowledge and strength of character.
Go to the world outside; make a difference; touch and transform the lives of people around you, and create a happier universe.
Friends:
If one investment can truly define a subtle linkage to future progress, it is education.
Countries built on the strength of education and knowledge have achieved development over longer periods of time.
Such countries have exhibited greater adaptive powers to changes in resource endowments.
Education has afforded them the ability to overcome resource constraints and build an economy on a high technological base.
Their grooming is essential as they are our future.
Enrolment in higher education is below 20 per cent in India.
Recognizing that this is not enough and may drag down the potential of our future generation, rapid strides have been made to expand the higher education infrastructure.
A decisive step was the creation of several central universities during the last decade, including Manipur University which was made a Central University in 2005.
These universities along with the existing ones are envisaged as trail blazers for ushering in a high quality knowledge society.
Not a single Indian university figures in the list of top 200 universities in the world.
I have been sharing my concerns about the performance of Indian institutions in world university rankings during my visits to the universities.
This issue was also discussed in the Annual Conference of Vice Chancellors of Central Universities held in the Rashtrapati Bhavan.
In September last year, the Finance module of IIM, Calcutta was adjudged by a reputed agency as the best amongst business schools offering the Master of Management programme.
I want our institutions to build up on these micro-level successes and achieve a much higher overall ranking.
We have to rise from our slumber and beat the inertia that defines our current state of functioning.
Friends:
The quality of teachers is a portrayal of the educational standards.
Several measures are required for faculty development.
The vacant teacher positions have to be filled up on priority.
Talented faculty from abroad have to be hired to inject new thinking and diversity in academic approach.
Governance structures have to promote faster and transparent decision-making.
In this context, the induction of reputed alumni into the governance mechanism could provide the dynamism that our institutions are often in short supply of.
An institutional arrangement for industry-academia interface is essential to explore the contours of collaboration like sponsorship of research endowments and chairs, and conduct of internship programmes.
Knowledge networks facilitate intellectual collaboration.
They mitigate physical constraints as well.
Effective use of technology-based media for greater academic exchange is the need of the hour.
Friends:
We have to adopt a multi-disciplinary approach in our academic system as most research activity requires the meeting of minds from diverse disciplines.
We have to concentrate on the unique features of the region in which a university is located.
A way forward could be to give wings to the ingenuous ideas of students and grassroots innovators.
Novel ideas that can be nurtured into viable products deserve mentoring by the universities.
An initiative taken in several central universities is the setting up of Innovation Clubs.
To refine this further, activities of such clubs have to be dovetailed with innovation incubators located in IITs and NITs in the region.
India is proud of the achievements made by the young men and women of Manipur and looks forward to them bringing more glory to our country in the future.
It is important that all people, especially, the youth of this state recognize that economy and society can flourish only in an atmosphere free from violence.
No problem is ever resolved by violence.
India is today a nation on the move.
Let a new dawn emerge.
It is for this reason that several major economic development and infrastructure projects are being taken up in the State.
Let us celebrate the fact that India is the largest democracy in the world though sometimes noisy.
Elections to the 16th Lok Sabha are under way and the people of our country, including the people of this State have turned out in record numbers to cast their votes and assert their rights.
I am sure that it will play an important and constructive role in improving the welfare of students of this University.
It is unfortunate that the capital city of Delhi had some time back witnessed certain tragic incidents of attacks on young people from the north-east.
I am happy that both the Central Government and the Delhi Government have taken firm action, by not only apprehending and punishing the accused but also putting in place measures to ensure that such incidents do not recur.
Friends:
Assuming global leadership by India is no longer a utopian proposition.
You, the educated youth of our country, will build this resurgent new India.
Use the education you have received here to become the change-agents in society.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
The personnel have always set the highest standards in pursuit of excellence that others would do well to emulate.
28 MADRAS has a glorious history since raising and has proved its mettle during various operations in varied terrains.
The Battalion has rightfully been awarded with two unit citations and a plethora of other bravery awards since its raising.
This has been possible due to the dedication, sincerity and professionalism of the troops, both past and present of the Battalion.
Many visiting dignitaries have applauded the professional conduct of the personnel on parade.
I wish you success in all your future endeavours.
The unit will be relieving 28 MADRAS and taking over an extremely prestigious and honourable assignment as ceremonial Army Guard Battalion at Rashtrapati Bhavan.
Jai Hind.
The official recognition, by the International Certification Commission that India has effectively immunized its population against polio - that there has not been a single case of polio detected in India in the last three years - is a momentous occasion indeed.
For a country that was, till only recently, among the worst affected by the virus, this is a landmark achievement.
I offer my felicitations to the people of India on this historic day and wish them the best of health and happiness.
In order to ensure this we need the effective deterrence provided by a strong defence force.
As a Nation we stand firmly committed to peace, stability and prosperity.
The Air Warriors, who smartly stand before us today epitomise the grit and determination of our Air Force in fulfilling their responsibilities towards the Nation by upholding the highest standards of service ethos.
I place on record my deepest appreciation for all Air Warriors of the IAF for their devotion to duty, professionalism and a selfless spirit of service.
I also take this opportunity to congratulate all the Air Warriors on parade for their impeccable drill and smart turnout which infact reflects the pride which they feel for the Air Force and the Nation.
As one of the first helicopter units of IAF raised in the Eastern Sector, it has served with distinction.
Upon its inception, the Depot was tasked to repair and overhaul aeroengines for Vampire, Mystere and Toofani aircraft which represented the backbone of our fighter fleet at that time.
Over the years the unit has significantly upgraded its capabilities by absorbing contemporary technologies and best technical practices.
Today, the Depot is handling the aeroengine maintenance support requirements for the Kiran trainer, MiG-27 and the Mirage aircraft fleet.
On this occasion, I take the opportunity to compliment all the Air Warriors, Civilians and families of 112 HU and 4 BRD for their dedication and devotion to service.
The Nation is indeed proud of you all.
I wish you and your families the very best and a glorious future.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,
Greetings
Tribute to all the women of India
As we recognise six outstanding women for their excellence and achievements in the field of social development, I would like to pay tribute to all the women of India who have given the nation their invaluable gift of labour and love.
As respected professionals in all walks of life, women have, in no less measure, made their mark in the frontiers of science, space exploration and research alike.
Distinguished participants, as a people with an ancient history, are we always mindful that in our traditional social systems, women were accorded due equality and respect.
More than 3000 years ago, our society had sanctioned women many liberties.
Co-education existed and girls had equal opportunities to study.
It is important to remind ourselves of this.
When India gained her independence, our Founding Fathers were firm in their commitment to provide equal rights for the women of free India.
When they drafted our Constitution, they duly introduced this principle in its Preamble, Fundamental Rights and in the Directives Principles.
As a result, over the decades, Central and State Governments have focused on gender parity in school education and healthcare in both the rural and urban sectors.
Female literacy, a key element of empowerment, has seen an increase and was 65.46% in 2011.
The National Rural Health Mission, Integrated Child Development Services scheme and water & sanitation policies have helped reduce infant and maternal mortality rates.
The National Food Security Act of 2013 also includes an important element of maternity benefit.
It is seen that strengthening local government institutions has brought more than 10 lakhs women into our panchayats and urban local bodies and this is a notable step towards the desired political empowerment of women.
However, our satisfaction at this progress, though significant, should not divert our attention from the most reprehensible violations of the rights and dignity of women in India by our own people.
It is hard to comprehend that anyone who has been brought up with Indian values could engage in the savagery that comes to light every single day.
These initiatives are timely initiatives.
Today, more than half our population is of the age group of about 25 years or younger.
They are more socially aware and are developing a whole new set of value systems.
This is, therefore a critical target group and we must not lose any time or opportunity to guide them in the right direction.
When I met you a year ago, I had mentioned that new legislations, no matter how well conceived, must be supported by efficient enforcement mechanisms.
Needless to say, legislation, alone, cannot emancipate our women.
There is a need for a fundamental re-setting of our mental and moral make-up, our civic sense and our social conduct.
As we appreciate these inspiring words, let us apply ourselves, with sincerity, to the goal of bettering the lives and prospects of women and children in India.
I once again congratulate the Ministry of Women and Child Development and offer my felicitations to the distinguished awardees.
I am sure that your example and leadership will inspire many.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I am pleased to receive the four White Papers developed by the members of the Healthcare Alliance.
These are an outcome of the contributions and perspectives garnered from global experts in the field.
I hope that the recommendations for the Government, healthcare providers, industry and the community at large would serve to be valuable inputs in charting the future course of healthcare in the coming years.
As I understand, we have experts and innovators from Joslin Diabetes Center, Duke University, Harvard University, Stanford University and many other renowned global organizations, amidst us.
I compliment the leadership of Apollo Hospitals for envisioning the Conference which is a meaningful step forward towards our shared goal of a healthier nation tomorrow.
The focused perspectives in the White Papers would be a positive step towards a practical and collaborative commitment for the betterment of health of the people.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Though India has made significant inroads in the healthcare sector since independence, a lot more still remains to be done.
It is necessary to create an efficient healthcare delivery system, one that provides high quality, affordable medical facilities to the people, and in particular, to the weak and disadvantaged sections of society.
The National Rural Health Mission proved to be a landmark initiative and contributed immensely to the restructuring of health services in rural India.
Now, the National Urban Health Mission envisages to meet health care needs of the urban population with a focus on the urban poor, by making essential primary health care services available to them and reducing their out of pocket expenses for treatment.
This will be achieved by strengthening the existing health care delivery system, targeting the people living in slums and converging with various schemes relating to wider determinants of health by various Ministries.
Focus needs to be on early detection of diseases.
There is a wide recognition that non-communicable diseases are the biggest public health challenge that the world faces today.
The global burden from non-communicable diseases is significant and is rising at a rapid pace.
Preventive and health promotion programmes, public awareness and behaviour change communication would undoubtedly be important steps to prevent non-communicable diseases.
The strong linkage between poverty, lack of education and limited access to health services is well recognized.
Healthcare infrastructure and initiatives therefore need to be complemented by empowerment through education, especially of the girl child.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
A sustained focus on healthcare excellence in India is crucial not only for our nation, but the world at large.
India is a regional resource for high quality care.
As one of the largest manufacturer and exporters of medicine, India has brought cost efficiency to the world in the generics domain.
This is a huge advantage that needs to be leveraged further.
Our healthcare systems must gear up to fully utilize this potential.
Advanced satellite technology is enabling telemedicine systems that can connect remote health centres with Super Specialty Hospitals in far away urban areas.
Technology has the power to transform healthcare.
Effective and inexpensive cure, reduction of our reliance on costly imported medical equipment can all be met with an added thrust on indigenous technology.
The Science, Technology and Innovation Policy, 2013 which makes innovation a key goal should be leveraged by our medical schools, research laboratories, and the pharmaceutical and instrumentation industries to further the cause of Indian healthcare.
India has completed three years without a single case of the debilitating infection and the WHO certification for India celebrates this success.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
History provides us enough evidence that healing traditions have flourished in our nation since the Vedic ages.
The post-Vedic age saw some of India's most powerful healthcare systems come to the fore.
The earliest and the most popular of these is the great Indian tradition of Ayurveda.
Other than Ayurveda, India's strong culture of cure gave rise to other popular systems like Rasashastra and Siddha.
It is promising to note that today, traditional Indian healthcare is recognised and respected the world over.
Leading healthcare providers around the world are exploring the incredible promise of our traditional healing.
This is an avenue that should be further dwelt upon and we may possibly discover new cures for the new-age medical problems.
India is recognized for its great innovation and professional skills.
The march to good health cannot be delayed; it is the key to sustaining our success story in the long run.
However, for it to become a revolution it must include the citizens of the country.
To transform the ideas emerging out of the Healthcare Conference into a reality, all stakeholders need to make collective efforts in the direction of achieving good health for all.
I urge all present to make it their mission to infuse in all a passion for healthy living.
My best wishes to the Healthcare Alliance for its mission of providing equitable healthcare to the people.
Let us all strive collectively for a better and healthier tomorrow.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This largest para-military force in the world has confronted and resolved numerous key challenges to internal security.
With its resolute commitment and battle worthiness, it has assuaged the aggrieved regions of the country from disturbances.
This initiative will also instill a sense of identity and camaraderie amongst the CRPF personnel.
I congratulate all its members for rendering their services to the nation.
The history of CRPF is thick with acts of bravery and valour.
CRPF has produced many a chivalrous sons who have done their utmost in securing our country.
I take this opportunity to also salute the brave hearts from this security force, who have sacrificed their lives at the call of duty.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Our institutions entrusted with the maintenance of peace and security have an arduous task.
They have to be proactive as law enforcers and effective as partners in growth and development.
The frequent challenges to the rule of law have to be confronted by implementing the law in letter and spirit.
In this context, I want to mention that whatever the situation or provocation, there is no room in a liberal democracy for use of violence aimed at intimidation and delivering extra judicial justice.
This belief must be firmly inculcated in the minds of all the personnel who are taking on security challenges at the ground level.
They are drafted for law and order situations and to control riots.
In handling various challenging tasks, the personnel of these law enforcing agencies have to be responsive to the humane side of policing.
They have to be always sensitive to the vulnerable sections like women, children and the aged.
The Indian electorate is one-seventh of the global population.
The election of a government at the Centre by the people every five years is an exercise of gigantic proportions and poses enormous challenge to all those involved in its conduct.
The security forces, particularly the CRPF, have to give their best in ensuring that free and fair elections are held under a peaceful atmosphere.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
India, in particular, is a target of various terrorist groups operating in the region.
The security forces and the intelligence mechanism have to be alert every second to avert any event that can strike terror or disrupt peace.
The pernicious designs of the terrorists have to be defeated at all levels.
The fangs of their vicious and divisive blueprint have to be countered with a multi-pronged approach.
To my mind, using information technology, harnessing better intelligence, and drawing greater cooperation from the people would be the key.
The operational engagement has to be all-encompassing.
A greater understanding and a sensitive handling has to be the core of the strategy in dealing with the affected areas.
I would like to make a special mention of the role played by the security forces in such difficult areas where they have created space; wherein developmental activity has begun; economy has picked-up and democratic process stands strengthened.
I appreciate the wonderful contribution of officers and Jawans of CRPF in the peaceful conduct of Assembly elections in Chhattisgarh recently.
The next few years will be critical.
Having reached a threshold, CRPF has to win over the hearts and minds of the people and restore complete normalcy in the disturbed areas.
The social media, which enables reaching out quickly to large number of people, has to be incessantly monitored for any incendiary messages.
Early warning systems have to be put to effective use in potentially troublesome situations.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Ground level tactics have to be made more innovative by the adoption of state-of-the-art planning strategies.
To give confidence to the troops, they have to be equipped with modern gadgetry and weaponry.
To develop their morale further, the welfare issues have to be addressed promptly.
The diversity of its role and its unique adaptability to situational requirements, and its capacity to deliver operational dividends in difficult circumstances has distinguished itself as a very valuable organization.
I commend the Union Home Ministry for giving every possible support to this crucial security unit.
I also appreciate the Director General of CRPF for providing a firm leadership to this Force.
I congratulate all the CRPF personnel who, by their dedication and commitment, have brought name and pride to the Force.
As it marches through its Diamond Jubilee year, I wish CRPF great success in all its endeavours.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I am also glad to have the opportunity to see so many young doctors, who have received their post-graduate (PG) degrees today.
From a humble beginning, this Hospital has now evolved into a state-of-the-art tertiary care facility.
From 50 beds in 1954, its in-patient healthcare today comprises over 1,200 beds.
It was set up to develop PG-level medical education and to produce specialists in different medical disciplines.
From 28 PG and 2 super-specialty seats, it now has 101 PG and 25 super-specialty seats and is known for its academic excellence.
I compliment the faculty and management for its stupendous progress in a short span of time and urge them to continue working hard.
A new super-specialty block and additional super-specialty courses have been envisaged.
These will raise academic standards further, and at the same time, benefit large number of patients.
I look forward to an early realization of these initiatives.
Dear young doctors:
It has empowered you to contribute to the society; to touch and transform the lives of people.
Be the torchbearer in mitigating their sufferings.
Your zeal to serve people must be unwavering always.
You have participated in the investigation and treatment of challenging ailments.
During your training here, you have had the opportunity to learn the mysteries of the human body.
As you receive this honour today, I am sure you feel indebted to all those suffering people who became your blackboard.
A healthy population exhibits a greater disposition towards seeking education, acquiring knowledge and accessing employment opportunities.
In 2005, the National Rural Health Mission was started to take healthcare to the doorstep of the rural population through a network of sub-centres, primary health centres and community health centres.
Better infrastructure, trained manpower, effective drugs and modern equipments have improved service delivery.
This mission has now been extended to the urban areas.
Its reach to the last mile is not free of hassles.
The quality of healthcare delivery is found wanting at times.
These limiting factors have led many people to rely on costly medical treatment offered in the private sector.
High medical expenses can cause a setback in the lives of poor people.
Under the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana, beneficiaries are entitled to cash less in-patient treatment.
This facility should be comprehensive and made available for primary, secondary and tertiary healthcare.
We should ensure its benefits covering every poor of the country.
Friends:
Path-breaking initiatives in different fields have the imprint of cutting-edge technology.
In healthcare, technological applications have brought about a silent revolution.
The telemedicine project using satellite technology has helped establish linkages between health centres in remote areas and super-specialty hospitals in urban areas, and facilitated expert healthcare consultation reaching the needy and under-served.
Healthcare is a potential hotbed for technological pursuits.
Discovery of better formulations, indigenous production of sophisticated medical equipments, and development of nutritional and disease surveillance mechanisms are areas that call for innovative research.
I am sure our medical scholars and researchers and development centres are ready for this challenge.
Public expenditure on health in India is 1.2 per cent of GDP, much lower than the 4 per cent plus levels in countries like US, UK, Australia, Norway and Brazil.
The private healthcare providers also have to be encouraged and suitably engaged to provide quality healthcare services.
It is envisaged to increase this density of medical professionals to 354 by the end of the Twelfth Plan period.
Expansion of medical education infrastructure deserves top priority.
Introduction of new medical schools and capacity augmentation of existing ones is necessary.
In this context, it is gratifying to note that six AIIMS-like institutions have been started.
All concerned with the management of the medical discipline has to undertake faculty development with ceaseless energy.
Advances in medical sciences occur at lightning speed today.
Our medical schools have to continuously up-grade their syllabi and frequently review the horizon of their research activities.
Friends:
It is a unique blend of science and humanity.
You are often placed on the same pedestal as divinity.
You must respect the sacred trust that people have reposed in you.
You must always remember the true meaning of the Hippocratic Oath you took on entering this noble profession.
Reputed medical institutions like yours have a duty to develop a humanistic approach in the young doctors and orient them towards a value-based career in medicine.
I hope that you all will remain firm in your conviction to the higher objective of selfless service to society.
I wish you all success in life and career.
I also wish the doctors, faculty members and others working in this Institute good luck.
With these words, I conclude.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be with you on the occasion of the First Convocation of the Indian Maritime University, Chennai.
I understand that over a thousand graduates and post graduates in various disciplines such as Nautical Sciences, Marine Engineering, Naval Architecture & Ocean Engineering, Shipbuilding & Repair, Port and Shipping Management, International Transportation & Logistics Management, and Maritime Law are getting their degrees today.
This Convocation marks your transition from student to maritime professional.
I am sure that throughout your career you will hold aloft the flag of your alma mater and make it proud.
India has had a very rich maritime history dating back to the 3rd millennium BCE when the denizens of the Indus Valley civilisation initiated maritime trading contacts with Mesopotamia.
The world's first dock at Lothal in modern Gujarat (2400 BCE) was located away from the main sea currents to avoid deposition of silt, thereby indicating possession of considerable knowledge of oceanography, hydrography and maritime engineering.
Kingdoms on the west coast of India engaged in active sea trade with ancient Persia, Arabia and Egypt, and through them with ancient Greece and Rome.
Between 200 BCE and 1200 CE, kingdoms of eastern and southern India were engaged in active sea trade with what are now Burma, Malaysia, Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam and established trading posts in these far off lands.
The decline of Indian maritime power actually commenced in the thirteenth century, and it almost disappeared at about the same time that the sea power of the western nations became ascendant.
A new chapter in the history of Indian shipping began when a resolution was passed in the Central Legislative Assembly in 1926 recognising the need for the creation of a Training Institution to cater to the Indian Mercantile Marine.
This gave birth to Training Ship Dufferin, which was followed by Training Ship Rajendra (named after the great Chola King) and later replaced by a shore based establishment, the Training Ship Chanakya.
In 1947, the newly independent country's founders foresaw the need for modern merchant marine engineering training.
It was recognised that a continuing education and training programme was necessary to upgrade the skill set of maritime officers on board vessels.
These four Institutes have supplied a large number of highly professional maritime personnel who have won global recognition for their hard work, efficiency, dedication and intelligence and who are in great demand by shipping companies both Indian and foreign.
Later, in order to cater to the requirements of indigenous ship design and research, the Government of India founded the National Ship Design and Research Centre in Visakhapatnam in 1991.
Similarly, the Indian Institute of Port Management at Kolkata (1965) and the National Institute of Port Management at Chennai (1985) (later renamed as National Maritime Academy) were set up to fulfil the essential requirements of port management.
Inspite of this, only about 10% of our trade is carried out through Indian ships and our share of global seafarers is only 6%.
The ships manufactured in India carry even less cargo.
If India is to emerge as a major economic power in future, it would require substantial stepping up in the out-turn of quality maritime personnel and addition to our ship-building capacity.
Ship-building has the potential to generate a lot of employment, both in rural and urban areas.
In the Maritime Agenda 2020 of the Government of India, a target of enhancing the share of Indian seafarers in international shipping from the current level of 6% to 9% by the year 2015 has been envisaged.
It was with the objective of providing quality personnel against the backdrop of a mounting demand for professionals in marine engineering, nautical sciences, shipbuilding & repairs, etc that the Indian Maritime University was formed.
Headquartered at Chennai and with an all-India jurisdiction, it was established by an Act of Parliament in 2008, encompassing within its fold the seven legacy government Maritime Institutes.
I hope that the IMU shall, in future, lay stress on integrating theories with practice.
I would urge the University to study the international and national best practices in port and shipping management, logistics and transportation, marine environmental management, maritime risk and system safety, maritime administration (covering law, policy and security) and train academics as well as professionals in these areas.
And last but not the least, I would like to see more women seafarers.
The Indian Maritime University is the youngest of the Central Universities in India.
I am aware that it has faced several teething problems.
There has been a high rate of turnover of faculty and administrative staff over the last five years.
Many of the Faculty positions are yet to be filled up.
I am, however, confident that the University has a bright future ahead.
It is my fond hope that the IMU should aspire to become a Centre of Excellence in the medium term.
I foresee a time when the Indian Maritime University will be contributing meaningfully to nation building in general and to the maritime sector in particular.
The strength of a University is judged by its alumni.
Thousands of mariners have passed out from the seven legacy institutions which were subsumed in the Indian Maritime University, and these alumni must all feel that they belong to this University and work toward strengthening it by creating endowments.
I would urge each one of you graduating today not to forget your debt to your university, society and country and strive to work for the advancement of all three.
I wish you all the very best.
Jai Hind!
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It gives me great pleasure to welcome Your Majesty, King Hamad Bin Isa Al Khalifa and the distinguished members of your delegation on your first state visit to India.
Your Majesty, the mists of time have not been able to obliterate the origins of Indo-Bahraini relations.
Indeed, there is archaeological evidence of our ties going well back to the second millennium B.C.
Legend has it that for Indian traders who plied the trade route between the civilizations of Mesopotamia and Indus Valley, Bahrain, then known as Dilmun, was a halting-point where they refreshed themselves and prepared for the arduous journey further ahead.
This was, naturally, also an occasion for cultural and other exchanges including the flourishing trade of Bahraini pearls and dates and Indian spices.
India and Bahrain are thus two countries who share a glorious past and a dynamic present.
Ours is, indeed, a long standing friendship based on civilisational ties and we both value this immensely.
We have, in recent times, expanded our ties of trust and understanding into a comprehensive relationship across the full spectrum of political, economic, commercial and people to people contacts.
Your Majesty, Bahrain has generously embraced a large number of Indian expatriates and encouraged them to flourish and prosper, which we deeply appreciate.
On their part, Indians in Bahrain have worked with dedication and sincerity to contribute wholeheartedly to the development and progress of their host country.
They provide an organic link with India and act as a strong bridge in the furtherance of our partnership.
Propelled by the vitality of our close contacts, we have built a multifaceted and mutually beneficial partnership.
I am conscious of the fact that Your Majesty is accompanied by a high-powered business delegation.
I am confident that the delegation will have fruitful talks with their Indian counterparts.
Over the past two decades India has made important strides in economic growth and technological innovation.
Our economy is resilient; and despite the global economic downturn, India remains a sound investment destination.
We welcome, with open arms, our Bahraini friends, both from the private as well as the public sector, to invest in India.
India rejoices at the progress and prosperity achieved by Bahrain and remains committed to be a dependable partner in your developmental projects.
Our companies, with rich experience in executing complex and large infrastructure projects, are most interested in contributing to such projects in Bahrain.
There is vast potential for our bilateral cooperation based on our inherent strengths and complementarities, including in areas such as healthcare, environment, education, information technology and renewable energy sources.
Your Majesty, India and Bahrain both desire to see enduring peace and stability in the Gulf and West Asia.
Security cooperation has added a new dimension to our multifaceted relationship.
This reflects our shared vision that our cooperation is necessary for countering extremism and maritime piracy that directly affect our nations and our peoples.
We deeply value your personal contribution to the strengthening of our close relations.
I once again welcome you and your distinguished delegation to India and wish you a comfortable stay.
I am confident that your visit will lead to several new mutually beneficial initiatives and enhanced cooperation between our Governments and our people in the years to come.
Please accept, Your Majesty, our best wishes for your personal well being and the progress and prosperity of the friendly people of Bahrain.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am very happy to inaugurate the New Delhi World Book Fair, 2014.
These values constitute the essence of India.
We must do everything possible to preserve, protect, promote and nurture these ideals.
We must be uncompromising in rejecting intolerance, prejudice and hatred.
Multiple views, thoughts and philosophies have competed with each other peacefully for centuries in our country and freedom of speech is one of the most important fundamental rights guaranteed by our Constitution.
Friends,
The New Delhi Book Fair which started in 1972 has played the twin role of being a cultural as well as business hub quite admirably for more than four decades.
It is an important initiative which helps spread reading habits and contributes to creating a book culture within our community.
Reading not only enriches knowledge but helps us socially connect.
Books carry the wisdom of generations.
Reading helps widen views, encourage imagination and expand mental horizons.
It is said that children are the best readers of literature because they have no patience for pretence.
Literary giants like Rabindranath Tagore, Premchand, Abanindranth Tagore and Sukumar Roy have written for children.
No human society can develop in all its dimensions if it does not produce meaningful literature for its children and young readers.
I also appeal to parents and teachers to inculcate in children the habit of reading at a young age itself.
Implanting the habit of reading in children will ensure that it becomes a skill that stands them in good stead throughout their lives.
I am happy that Poland is the Guest Country this year.
Poland is a country and a culture with which India has had close relations for long years.
An illustrated book for children titled Little Chopin on the childhood of the legendary Polish music composer, Fredric Chopin has been published in English by NBT in association with Polish Institute.
I congratulate them on this initiative and hope more such literary exchanges will be made possible due to the participation of Poland as Guest country this year.
I believe the habit of reading books and printed material is inherent in the human civilization.
No technological up-gradation can replace this habit.
For a developing country like India, which has diverse needs and aspirations, printed books and digital media must be complementary and not rival to each other.
India is one of the top six publishing countries in the world today.
In terms of English-language books, it is the third largest after the US and the UK.
The number of books being published in India is estimated to be growing at 25-30% every year.
Our oldest scriptures prescribed that the framework of society should be established around the pillars of knowledge.
Our challenge is to convert knowledge into a democratic force and take it into every corner of our country.
There is a great hunger for knowledge in our country.
I welcome all of you, especially the distinguished foreign participants of the Fair to this wonderful event and wish the Fair a grand success.
Book fairs are events which provide a forum for activities to enrich the intelligent mind, inspire new ideas and at same time also offer business opportunity.
Happy reading to all of you.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
They deserve our deepest appreciation for their service to the cause of humanity.
I hope that their contribution inspires many more to join the crusade for ending this social malaise and empowering those suffering from leprosy.
He understood the social dimensions of this disease and worked relentlessly to reintegrate patients of leprosy into the social mainstream.
His efforts to eliminate the social ostracism accorded to people afflicted by leprosy went a long way in spreading awareness about the disease.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Patients were viewed with abhorrence, ostracized and subjected to inhuman treatment.
Today, the stigma and prejudice against leprosy has reduced considerably, thanks to the constant work of scientists and researchers.
We have successfully achieved elimination and are now moving towards eradication of leprosy.
This improvement has been possible due to the availability of effective multiple drug treatment to cure the disease, increased awareness as well as access to technology.
At a time when patients of leprosy were abhorred and socially isolated, the Foundation worked to ensure integration of leprosy patients into the social mainstream.
I am happy to note that until 1st April 2012, 33 States and Union Territories had attained the levels of leprosy elimination of less than 1 case per 10,000 population.
542 districts out of 640 had also achieved elimination by March 2012.
The State of Chhattisgarh and the Union Territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli still have a prevalence rate between 2 and 4 per 10000 population.
Bihar, Maharashtra and West Bengal, which had achieved elimination earlier, have now shown a slight increase in prevalence of leprosy in the current year.
I understand that 209 high endemic districts have been identified in 2012-13 which need our focused attention.
Over the years, the scourge of leprosy has remained a blot on humanity.
More than the medical condition, the social stigma attached to the disease is a cause for concern.
There is a need to empower those who have been socially discriminated an account of leprosy, through advocacy and information dissemination.
Social challenges for leprosy do persist, but at the same time, it is heartening to note that the United Nations has now passed a resolution on discrimination against people affected by leprosy and efforts are being made to repeal laws that prevent people affected by leprosy from participating in society.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The major challenge in leprosy control activities lies in sustaining the same level of focus and commitment especially in low-resource settings where equity of access is an issue.
This is necessary, otherwise all that has been achieved with regard to control of leprosy will be undermined.
Specialist services for leprosy are no longer sustainable or cost-effective.
The responsibility now lies with all aspects of the general health care system to be vigilant for diagnosing and treating leprosy early so that people affected by leprosy receive care within the general health services.
On this occasion, I urge all stakeholders to come together and make concerted efforts for the total eradication of leprosy.
I also wish the Gandhi Memorial Leprosy Foundation and all those involved in this noble mission all success in their endeavors.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
The picturesque location, idyllic surroundings and quiet atmosphere makes it an ideal destination for the pursuit of learning and creativity.
I also congratulate the second batch of students who have graduated from this fledgling university.
It is hearty to see the joy of accomplishment in all of you.
Remember that you were treated with care and provided with attention here.
You felt guided, secured and enriched.
As you step out of your academic universe today, be assured that your education will always keep you in good stead; you will thrive wherever you go and shine whatever you do.
The educated is a trustee of a special responsibility.
The upliftment of your less fortunate compatriots is a sacred task that precocious people like you must perform.
This obligation to your country is something that you must always cherish.
It is a bond that you must not sever.
So, go; live your dreams.
At the same time, live the dreams of your country and countrymen.
Friends:
Particularly, higher education can deliver great benefit to society; gains that are unthinkable without allowing education full play.
Recognizing this, higher education has received focused attention over the last few years.
Many universities and technical institutions have taken birth during the Eleventh Plan period.
21 central universities, 8 IITs, 7 IIMs and 10 NITs have been started.
With the exception of Goa, we have a central university in every state today.
By creating new institutions of higher learning and gearing up the capacity of existing ones, we have sought to take care of the increasing number of students wanting to pursue higher studies.
Strategic locations of new universities and institutions have helped improve accessibility to meritorious students from remote regions.
We have a more pressing challenge; to elevate the scholastic value of our students.
It is a worrying fact that the standards of education in many of our institutions are below benchmark.
There is not a single Indian institution in the list of top 200 universities in the world.
Some of our universities and engineering institutions are indeed capable of figuring much higher in the ranks.
Concrete action is required to not only have an in-depth understanding of the criteria and process followed by the ranking agencies, but to also develop a strategy to project the achievements more effectively.
Friends:
I am confident that the takeaways would be implemented within the timeframe.
Every discipline undergoes rapid change in conceptual understanding and theoretical underpinning.
Teachers will do well to keep themselves abreast with the latest formulations.
There is also a continuing shortage of bright people for teaching positions in higher educational institutions.
The large number of vacancies is ominous, especially in the context of our drive to rejuvenate this sector.
We have to attract talent to fill up unoccupied faculty posts through flexible and innovative solutions.
Specialists from abroad should also be drafted into our education system to inject new ideas.
Through the use of knowledge networks, academic institutions can defeat physical constraints and reach one another in a meaningful collaboration of ideas, thoughts and knowledge.
Sharing of course material and important lectures can mitigate the lack of expertise in a particular field.
It can also help establish uniform standards across educational institutions in the country.
I have started using video-conferencing when I delivered my New Year Message to over 450 institutions this year.
I intend to reach out to you more.
On your part, I hope you will take greater recourse to ICT networks in your normal academic and intellectual interactions with the world beyond your campus.
Governance structures have to be supportive of innovative ideas and also facilitative of faster decision-making.
The expertise and experience of alumni, who are well-established, can be utilized for effective university management.
Studies have shown how alumni participation in university governance improves academic performance.
Our universities, especially the older ones, should make a definitive move towards engaging alumni in their activities.
In times to come, I expect this University to also involve the alumni purposefully in its academic affairs.
Friends:
Institutional mechanism for greater collaboration has to be in place.
In the Conference of Vice Chancellors, I have spoken about the need for every central university to set up an Industry Interface Cell.
Such a body can work towards galvanizing industry initiatives like setting up research chairs and endowments.
I am hopeful that such cells comprising local industry, industry associations, alumni and faculty will be formed in each central university soon.
Successful research programmes offer vast possibilities to make a difference in the lives of people.
Countries devoid of natural endowments have progressed solely on the strength of technological advancements brought about by intensive research.
A developing country like India has to address the grand challenges of renewable energy, climate change, drinking water and sanitation.
Research in these areas will have spin-offs unimaginable in terms of benefits to the common man.
Our universities have to be the breeding ground for creative pursuits.
They have to be the source of cutting edge technological developments.
A beginning has already been made by the opening of Innovation Clubs in several central universities to promote ingenuity and exchange ideas.
As the next step, innovation clubs should work in tandem with innovation incubators located in the IITs or NITs in the region to take forward the novel, workable ideas of grassroots innovators to create useful products.
I want all the central universities, including the Central University of Himachal Pradesh, and their faculty and students to give their supreme effort for these awards.
I thank you for inviting me to your annual convocation.
Confidence breeds hope.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to inaugurate this seminar being organized on the occasion of the Golden Jubilee of the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC).
I congratulate all Central Vigilance Commissioners, past and present as well as staff who have worked for the CVC over the years, for their commendable service to the nation.
It is fitting that the Department of Posts has decided to release a stamp on this important occasion.
I also commend the CVC for bringing out a Coffee Table Book on the occasion.
Members of Parliament expressed concern over corruption in public administration and sought remedial measures.
Consequently, then Home Minister Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri set up a Committee to look into the matter under the Chairmanship of Shri K. Santhanam, Member of Parliament.
They were:
(i) Administrative delays,
(ii) Government taking upon itself more than what it could manage by way of regulatory functions,
(iii) Scope for personal discretion in the exercise of powers vested in different categories of Government servants, and
(iv) Cumbersome procedures in dealing with various matters which were of importance to citizens in their day to day affairs.
The sad reality is that none of these problems have gone away.
Fifty years later, they continue to plague our governance system.
Over the years, successive Governments have progressively strengthened the institutional framework for addressing corruption with the establishment of the Central Bureau of Investigation, the Directorate of Enforcement, State Anti-Corruption agencies and Lokayuktas.
Elaborate conduct rules have been established to promote integrity in public services.
The Supreme Court and High Courts have also through public interest litigation contributed to the battle against nepotism and corruption.
As the Prime Minister mentioned Vineet Narain case was a landmark judgement in this regard.
Further, the enactment of the Lokpal Act, 2013 marks a major step forward in strengthening the institutional framework for addressing corruption.
Our Prime Minister has spoken about several other legislations pending before Parliament.
Once enacted, they will add to the formidable array of measures in place to address corruption.
Corruption remains a major stumbling block in the progress of our nation.
It has increased transaction costs, reduced efficiency of public services, distorted decision making processes and undermined the moral fibre of our society.
Corruption has reinforced inequities and limited access to public services by the common man, especially the poor.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The air is thick with despair and cynicism.
There is urgent need to restore the faith of our people in our governance system and the credibility of our institutions.
As Shastriji said, this is our duty and we must confront the challenge head on.
Let us redouble our efforts and address corruption on a war-footing.
The CVC has an important role to play in this regard.
The CVC is principal advisor to the Government on all matters relating to vigilance administration and is required to conduct vigilance audits of various systems and procedures in organizations as well as assist managements establish effective internal control systems and procedures.
The CVC must re-energise itself and pro-actively lead the charge against corruption.
At the same time, provision of such financial powers and administrative discretion in governance gives rise to opportunities for nepotism and corruption.
It must, at the same time ensure that vilification campaigns to destroy reputations and careers are not carried out in the name of checking corruption.
The CVC should be an ally to good governance and facilitate speedy, responsible and bold decision making in the interests of the country.
Members of the CVC and its staff must also set an example by maintaining the highest standards of probity in the discharge of their functions.
I hope this seminar will help the CVC evolve many more such instruments and explore new dimensions in our fight against corruption.
A large number opinion polls and surveys reveal that corruption is among the foremost concerns of our citizens.
I am confident the CVC will continue to function as a strong and effective body, making useful contribution to enhancing probity in governance and checking corruption as well as mal-administration.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
As Presiding Officers of our apex elected body, these distinguished personalities made significant contributions towards strengthening the edifice of our parliamentary democracy through their innovative rulings, directions, observations and initiatives.
As a mark of our respect to these stalwarts, their photographs and portraits have been installed today in this temple of democracy.
It represents the will and the aspirations of one billion plus people and is the link between the people and the government.
If Gangotri gets polluted, neither Ganga nor any of its tributaries can stay unpolluted.
It is incumbent upon all Parliamentarians that they maintain the highest standards of democracy and parliamentary functioning.
The Parliament, like other organs of the Government, is not sovereign and owes its origin and authority to the Constitution and derives its functional responsibility from, and discharges its responsibilities within the framework of the Constitution.
The validity of a law, whether Union or State, is tested by judiciary as defined in the Constitution.
The Parliament functions through Debate, Dissension and finally Decision and not through disruption.
Presently, the photographs of Presiding Officers of Central Legislative Assembly of pre-independence period have been displayed in the inner lobby of Lok Sabha Chamber in the Parliament House.
In order to continue this beautiful tradition, it was appropriately decided to have a Gallery of the Presidents of the Central Legislative Assembly and the former Speakers of the Lok Sabha and to install their photographs and portraits in the Outer Lobby of the Lok Sabha Chamber.
I also convey my appreciation for the selected artists who have done a tremendous job in painting the portraits.
Every Lok Sabha, as an apex elected body of the country, has successfully guided our nation on the path of progress.
In response to the unique circumstances every Lok Sabha has faced, the Parliament has evolved as an effective representative institution to meet the emerging challenges of our vibrant democracy.
By facilitating orderly conduct of business in the House, all the former Speakers of the Lok Sabha have significantly contributed to the effective functioning of the House and to the development of various parliamentary traditions, conventions, processes and procedures.
It was due to his farsightedness and wisdom that when the Constituent Assembly was drafting the Constitution, the founding fathers took cognizance of the importance of having an independent office of the Presiding Officer.
They very thoughtfully and appropriately incorporated Article 98 in our Constitution which provided for the creation of separate Secretariats for both the Houses of our Parliament.
Adequate powers are vested in the office of the Speaker through the Constitution, through the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the House and also through the conventions to ensure smooth conduct of the parliamentary proceedings.
Thank You.
Jai Hind.
It is my privilege to be here today to inaugurate the World Congress on Agro-forestry.
To begin with, let me extend a very heartly welcome to all the distinguished delegates from abroad.
I wish them all a very comfortable stay in Delhi and hope they enjoy its salubrious February weather.
Being held in the Asia-Pacific region for the first time, I consider it a great honour to be a part of this historic occasion.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This text describes arbori-culture, which is the science and practice associated with the cultivation, management and study of individual trees, shrubs, vines and woody plants.
It also provides a comprehensive description for the treatment of seeds and planting materials; selection of land; water management; plant nutrition and control of plant disorders; laying out of gardens and orchards, and growing of rare trees.
Some like Pipal find reference in ancient religious scriptures.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Yet, natural conservation has taken a backseat owing to the restless human drive towards urbanization, industrialization and food production.
It has also suffered the impact of climate change, which has captured global attention now.
2014 should be a defining moment for evolving tree-based production systems to fight the debilitating impact of climate change in agriculture.
The ecological foundations of soil, water, biodiversity and forests, essential for sustained advances in productivity, are under severe stress today.
There are an estimated 500 million small-holder farms in the developing world, supporting the livelihood of about 2 billion people.
These small farmers who practice family farming are economically vulnerable.
Recognizing the need to reposition family farming at the centre of agricultural, environmental and social policies in the national agendas of different countries, the United Nations (UN) has declared 2014 as the International Year of Family Farming.
Sustainable agricultural production systems based on the principle of environmental protection can indeed have a decisive influence in eliminating hunger and extirpating rural poverty.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is emerging as a major domain in environmentally sustainable food production systems.
Agro-forestry system produces food, fuel and fibre; contributes to food and nutritional security; sustains livelihoods; helps in preventing deforestation; increases biodiversity; protects water resources, and reduces erosion.
Carbon sequestration of agro-forestry farms is a low-hanging fruit for climate change mitigation, justifying greater investment in them.
Agro-forestry is also an important alternative to meet the target of increasing the vegetation cover to 33 per cent from the present level of below 25 per cent.
Forests occupy about 23 per cent.
There exists a vast potential for using agricultural land as a source of timber.
Agro-forestry also meets almost half of the total demand of 201 million tonne of fuel wood in the country.
Agro-forestry generates 450 labour days per hectare annually without negating farm productivity or income.
Agro-forestry is alluring as an alternate land use option.
Integration of agricultural and forest crops would not only prevent further land degradation but also ensure timber and firewood availability to the rural population.
For instance, the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Inter-governmental Panel on Climate Change have acknowledged agro-forestry as a crucial constituent of climate-smart agriculture.
The UN Convention to Combat Desertification recognizes agro-forestry as a key prospect for controlling desertification and pursuing rehabilitation.
The Convention on Biological Diversity views agro-forestry as a central element in its ecosystem approach for conservation of agro-biodiversity.
Agro-forestry is perhaps the only land use activity that has etched a relevant role for itself in the approaches espoused by these three important UN conventions.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Greater research is today required in agro-forestry, focused on creating eco-technologies that purposefully blend traditional ecological prudence with renewable energy technology.
It had also established a National Research Centre for Agro-forestry in 1988.
The Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education has recently initiated steps for unveiling another network programme on agro-forestry.
State Agricultural Universities having Forestry or Agro-forestry departments partner in these network activities.
These pioneering efforts have created a critical mass of manpower in the field of agro-forestry in the country.
Inadequate investment, lack of suitable extension strategies and weak market linkages compound the woes of this sector.
Rather than being discouraged by long gestation periods normally associated with agro-forestry projects, we need innovative models that encourage investment in this sector.
I am happy at the efforts being made to elevate agro-forestry to a wider framework in our policy discourse.
I am told that a draft National Agro-forestry Policy has been prepared, which I hope will be finalized soon.
A National Mission on Agro-forestry has also been planned that will ensure better coordination, seek convergence and derive synergy between various players operating in the sector.
The time for ideologic sermoning is over.
The cylinders can no longer remain idle.
It is time to fire.
With these words, I conclude.
May this Congress achieve all success.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be here today for the Annual Day Function of the Gondia Education Society.
Gondia is the gateway to Maharashtra from Central and Eastern India.
I thank you for giving me this opportunity to visit this important city in the Vidarbha region of this State.
He overcame great hardships in life and rose to become an industrialist, political leader, philanthropist and social reformer.
Gondia Education Society was the culmination of his visionary efforts.
It is indeed my good fortune to come on such a revered occasion.
I pay my sincere homage to this noble and worthy son of India.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
He did not allow his humble moorings to come in the way of his dreams.
He could not afford education and left his studies and home early to etch out a livelihood.
His struggle took him to various places.
He finally came to Gondia as a sixteen year old boy eager to make a mark for himself.
Due to sheer hard work and sincerity, he established himself as an industrialist.
He also became a prominent public figure in the State, getting elected to the Assembly four times.
Inspired by Gandhian ideals, he worked for the betterment of the society.
An idealistic human being, his sole vision was to do good to the society.
He felt the six per cent literacy rate in the area during that time to be completely unacceptable.
He felt that such low educational levels will hold back the potential of the people to achieve progress and prosperity.
His regret of not receiving education spurred him to undertake an ambitious venture to uplift the educational infrastructure of this region.
His missionary zeal in this direction was evident from the fact that on one single day, I am told, he opened 22 high schools and two senior colleges in Gondia and Bhandara districts.
The Gondia Education Society can today proudly boast of a system providing complete educational experience from the basic level to post graduation.
Its 60 colleges and high schools cater to the educational requirements of over one lakh students.
Higher education in colleges of this Society offers exposure to large number of traditional as well as new-age disciplines.
The not-for-profit institutions of the Society aim at providing world-class facilities at an affordable cost.
Scholarships and free education provided to the young students of the Gondia and Bhandara districts help them to pursue their dreams with confidence.
I urge the Society to continue the splendid work being carried out in the field of education with the same spirit and energy.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
India is fortunate to have a large young population to take forward her aspirational agenda of change.
The proportion of working age population between 15 and 59 years is increasing, with 63.5 million being added likely to this group between 2011 and 2016.
We have to make our manpower capable, so that they become active participants in the development process.
As per a recent survey, only 34 per cent of our students were found to be employable.
If job-led growth is one of our key strategies for inclusive development, then drastic action is needed to make the graduates passing out of our education system competent and employable.
We have to make them educationally sound and socially sensitive.
We also have to give thrust on upgrading standards in our academic institutions.
Adopting the open and distance learning mode and leveraging technology solutions hold great promise to address both quantity and quality concerns.
Information and communication technology solutions have the potential to address a multitude of shortages like faculty, infrastructure and resources that keeps an institution away from becoming globally acclaimed.
I am confident that the institutions of this Society will offer a world class learning experience to its students.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I am sure you all will do well in life.
With success, comes responsibility.
With greater success, comes greater responsibility.
You have to be true to the ideals that your institution stands for.
You ought to give back to the society what you have gained here.
You ought to have a strong sense of patriotism and social responsibility.
Those of you who want to undergo higher studies in premier institutions abroad deserve encouragement.
But remember: wherever you go, retain the sacred bond with your motherland.
Be open to ideas from all sides.
But never ape others blindly.
Never allow others to dominate our thinking.
Be firmly rooted to our reality.
I thank you once again for inviting me to be a part of this occasion.
I wish all of you the very best in life.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I congratulate each one of you on your Association crossing this significant milestone.
As the oldest Bar Association in the country, you occupy a very special place in the judicial history of India and the anniversary celebrations, therefore, assumes great importance.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It signaled an awakening amongst those in the legal profession to play a more active role in the movement for self rule.
It spawned a new breed of leadership from this profession that played a critical role in our struggle to achieve independence.
Training as lawyers and exposure to legal systems in India and abroad helped them to lay the philosophical foundations of our national movement.
Consequently, the freedom struggle gave liberty, basic rights and promotion of true democratic credentials in the country highest priority.
It aimed at the strengthening of the judicial system to pave the way for establishment of the rule of law.
Many were the products of the three Universities and the three High Courts of the then Bombay, Calcutta and Madras, and the legislative Councils established in India.
These reformers strived hard to create strong institutions and systems for their fellow countrymen.
Moderate in approach, they were men whose commitment to rule of law was unflinching.
These leaders emphasised the principles of tolerance and respect for peaceful dissent while underlining the importance of resorting to constitutional methods to achieve their declared goals.
This spirit has continued to guide us even after Independence, as we built our democratic institutions.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Through their dynamic leadership, they motivated the Indian lawyers who were struggling to secure their rightful place in the legal profession, to join hands and emerge as a collective force.
I compliment your Association for publishing a commemorative volume which highlights the sterling contribution of these founding members.
I urge the present generation of lawyers to draw inspiration from the commitment and adherence of these towering personalities.
Justice Nanabhai had also distinguished himself when he differed with the Chief Justice on the Ilbert bill, articulating the competence and capability of native Indian Judges to try Europeans.
It was he who paved the way for inclusion of Indians on the Bench on a permanent basis.
Their contribution to our social and political institutions was indeed profound.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Though I did not have the good fortune to practice at the Bar, the profession is indeed close to my heart as lawyers play a critical role in our society.
It should also make you proud that the legal profession is a noble profession especially in a democracy where the rule of law prevails.
But you have onerous responsibilities too.
When you represent a client, you are not only doing what is expected of you, but much more.
You can also be characterised as the soldiers who geared the principles of separation of powers.
You have earned this reputation as you agitate before the courts to rectify situations created by the improper exercise of authority or where an individual seeks justice.
This speaks volumes of your commitment and faith in the supremacy of the rule of law which is the bedrock of democracy.
In addition, you have to continuously strive to uphold the supremacy of the constitution.
This can only be achieved if the judiciary remains transparent, impartial and speedily dispenses justice.
Of these two pillars of an effective judicial architecture, our system is weak in speedily dispensing justice.
The backlog of cases in our courts is very disconcerting.
The total pendency of cases in the Indian courts is a staggering 3.1 crores.
This can only be rectified with your active cooperation.
Through your association, you should exhort your members to only seek adjournments where the reasons are compelling.
This is of singular importance as delays increase the cost of litigation rendering justice a distance mirage for the vast majority.
Lawyers must exude confidence and feel secure in their profession.
This is a precondition for the establishment of an effective justice delivery system.
At the same time, new entrants to the legal profession require support to find their feet.
I am sure this Act is being implemented in the true spirit to help new lawyers enter the profession.
You have strived hard for the protection of junior members of the Bar, and spearheaded many such noble causes.
This is commendable and the hallmark of a great tradition which comes from years of collective experience in leadership.
Your Association has also emphasized the nurturing of talents that has led several from your association to gain fame in jurisprudence.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
You have a huge responsibility to articulate and express their grievances and concerns, and assist the Courts to secure substantive justice for them.
You have to put your tremendous expertise and experience to good use.
You have to initiate the dialogue for systemic changes to improve the justice delivery system.
I am confident that the Association will succeed in keeping alive its rich tradition for all times to come and continue to be a great asset for our democracy.
I thank you for inviting me to be a part of the celebrations that marks 150th year of your body.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Madame Daniela Schadt,
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,
We see your visit as yet another occasion for Germany and India to reinforce our long standing ties of friendship and co-operation.
Today, our Governments are working closely on joint initiatives in a number of areas to achieve our common objectives.
We are consulting frankly on regional and international issues.
Our shared values impart both depth and vision to our efforts for achieving the aspirations of our respective peoples - and for global progress and prosperity.
We value our regular dialogue on the vital issues related to world trade and financial stability, climate change and sustainable development.
We are both committed to the reform of the United Nations and the multilateral institutions so that they reflect the current global realities and are able to effectively deal with the challenges of our times.
The intellectual exchanges, over the centuries, between our philosophers, academics and literary personalities have contributed to this.
German Philosophers like Kant and Hegel played an important role in introducing Indian philosophy to Europe in the 19th century.
Rabindranath Tagore and Albert Einstein cherished their discussions and deeply influenced each other.
In the early 19th Century, the University of Bonn had already established a Department of Indology.
The laying of the first telegraph line between London and Kolkata by Siemens in the 1860s was a transformational event.
We have undertaken important reforms to address the economic challenges that have come up and are confident of reverting to a robust pace of growth.
I am confident that businessmen, academicians, scientists and researchers in both our countries will be successful in identifying areas for further collaboration and ever higher levels of success.
We have a shared respect for the rights of individuals, rule of law and a free media.
I take this opportunity to congratulate you for your personal commitment and your contribution to the promotion of democracy and human rights.
- to the good health of His Excellency, President Joachim Gauck,
- to the continued progress and prosperity of the German people and
- to closer friendship and cooperation between India and the Federal Republic of Germany.
It is my pleasure to be here today to inaugurate this important Asia-Africa Agri-business Forum.
I am sure that this platform would provide a unique business environment to the participating business leaders, policy makers and other important stakeholders for exchanging ideas and experiences, and for collaborating on agri-business.
This forum will add another dynamic chapter to the evolving cultural, social, educational and economic engagements between these two continents.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It also plays a pivotal role in creating employment opportunities and promoting socio-economic development.
By 2030, global food production has to increase by forty per cent to keep pace with the world demand.
One billion people, representing fourteen per cent of the global population, is still afflicted by hunger.
Asia and Africa account for most of them.
This cannot continue any further.
Food production has to proceed in a business-unusual manner; on a war footing.
Agriculture makes much more than robust business sense in these continents.
The alleviating effects of this sector on poverty are alluring.
Studies have projected agriculture and agri-business to be a three trillion dollar business in Africa and almost 4.5 trillion dollar business in Asia by 2030.
The sector is plagued by serious constraints in production, demand and supply, export potential and processing capabilities.
The availability of land for agriculture is a crucial factor for food production.
The continent is endowed with 733 million hectares of arable land of which only 183 million hectares of land is currently under cultivation.
It is disheartening to note that huge tracts of land suitable for agriculture still remain uncultivated.
The shrinking and deteriorating land resources have to be judiciously used in order to sustain the needs of the future.
Adequate policies, strategies, technologies and human resources have to be in place.
It is indeed a matter of introspection as to how, despite availability of agricultural labour and sizeable arable land, notwithstanding some decline in Asia, many Asian and African countries have witnessed spiralling food prices.
There is a need for both the continents to overcome the challenges through symbiotic associations.
Partnerships must aim at developing the agri-business sector into an efficient business enterprise capable of competing in other international markets.
It is heartening to note that the agenda of this business forum includes forging new business partnerships, sharing best practices and new technologies, and exploring project finance and funding options.
The Accelerating Green Revolution programme in Africa seeks to achieve a quantum jump in productivity and production levels.
There is need for ICT to facilitate the development of extension services, value chain, production and marketing systems, and agriculture risk management.
An International Conference at Rwanda held recently has highlighted the need to have a South-South Cooperation Programme on ICT for Agriculture.
Farm mechanisation, as an efficiency inducing measure, has proved to be a great success in the US, CIS countries including Russia, and several European countries.
This programme has been initiated to promote customized hiring facilities for agricultural machinery and to also generate employment for the rural youth.
India is today a potential source of high-tech agricultural machinery.
Our country can provide agricultural equipment like harvester, thresher and bailer machinery, earth moving equipment, tractors and sowing machinery to African nations.
The experience of different countries in contract farming needs to be shared so as to build a greater understanding of and acceptance for this model.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Africa has tremendous scope for benefiting from the development of the food processing industry.
India can provide training in post harvest management of different crops and provide assistance in developing packaging technology in line with world standards.
India has requisite expertise for each level of the value chain and can assist African countries in developing the same.
Major investment in infrastructure like irrigation, water conservation, roads, markets and cold chains is also necessary.
I strongly recommend that the investing firms and banks forge a strategic partnership to address the credit requirements of both Asian and African countries.
This would help the agri-business and food processing sectors to meet their requirement for finance.
I am sure that the discourse and dialogue amongst businesses will bring out several new ideas for cooperation as well as solutions to tackle the challenges that Asia and Africa face in the agriculture and agro-processing sectors.
I compliment the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry for organizing this one-of-a-kind conclave.
Let me also avail of this opportunity to welcome all the international delegates who have come to India to take part in this inter-continental dialogue.
Thank You.
Jai Hind.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I compliment the Ministry of Culture and all stakeholders, on this initiative which marks yet another significant step forward towards our goal of creating a Knowledge Society.
Their goal is the improvement of society by helping the individual to understand himself and the world of which he is a part.
Libraries provide easy access of knowledge to all.
Thus, through democratization of access to knowledge, libraries contribute in promoting inclusive and sustained development of the people.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Set up in pursuance of the recommendations of the National Knowledge Commission, this is an important step towards the objective of providing access to knowledge to all which is one of our basic national priorities.
This is truly a step in the right direction.
With the aim of equitable and universal access to knowledge resources, the National Virtual Library of India would provide digital resources by digitizing the relevant reading material in different languages, which would be shared at all levels.
I am happy to know that the target users of NVLI will not only be students, researchers, doctors and professionals but also the educationally, socially, economically and physically disadvantaged groups.
Thus, it would empower people with information in order to create a knowledge society and also ensure preservation of digital content for posterity.
As each generation becomes more in tune with the Internet, their desire to retrieve information as quickly and easily as possible has increased.
Finding information by simply searching the Internet is considered much easier and faster than reading an entire book.
I am confident that this initiative of National Mission on Libraries will largely facilitate the internet savvy people in making maximum use of library resources.
I understand that these model libraries would be facilitated with subscription of E-Journals/E-Book services through Web VPN Services developed by National Informatics Centre.
These would also be provided with reading resources to meet the local needs.
It is appreciable that appropriate facilities would be created to meet the needs of Senior Citizens, Specially abled persons and children.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Effective knowledge creation and knowledge deployment can lead to societal transformation and wealth generation.
Information and knowledge should be disseminated not only in an efficient and cost effective manner but also in formats that are easily accessible to the masses.
This will contribute to improvements in the living standards of the underprivileged population of the society.
It is essential to bridge the digital divide and the use of ICT can be instrumental in doing so.
We need to realize the full potential of ICT in decentralized governance and in better delivery of services, particularly those relating to education.
I am happy to note that descriptive statistics about the public and other libraries will be acquired and a study will also be undertaken of the impact of libraries on the quality of life and economic gains of the people.
I am happy to learn that the National Mission on Libraries will conduct a holistic professional and personal development programme for Library professionals through capacity building.
The purpose of Capacity Building is to develop on-line training modules, tutorials and e-learning module for libraries and to contribute towards overall development of the library personnel.
The National Mission on Libraries which is dedicated to building a world class national resource base will enable us to know our country and ourselves better through the published heritage and also provide an effective gateway to National and International sources of information.
It can liberate us from the shackles of ignorance and help us rise above narrow considerations of caste, creed and region.
Sharing of knowledge can help in taking the society forward towards enlightenment and can become an important tool for national progress, human empowerment and social change.
It is essential to imbibe the spirit of social readiness to serve humanity.
True knowledge involves the inculcation of a positive outlook and leads to the development of sound character in an individual.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am sure the National Mission of Libraries will promote enlightenment and understanding and go a long way in making the masses active participants in the affairs of the nation.
I am indeed happy and appreciative of Chief Election Commissioner and his colleagues for inviting me on the fourth National Voters' Day to share some of my perceptions with this very distinguished audience.
Just 64 years ago, on this very day, the founding fathers of our Constitution gave our country this unique organization to organize and supervise elections.
It re-affirms the power of the people to determine their own destiny by exercising the freedom to elect their own representatives.
It is, therefore, an organization that has immense responsibilities and whose efficient functioning has a singular bearing on the quality of democracy in the country.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Since then, we have built on the democratic foundations.
A large number of nations that gained freedom around the same time also adopted democratic systems of governance, but India is one of the very few nations that has been able to strengthen its democratic ethos.
In comparison, unfortunately many nations degenerated into autocratic rule while India overcame many challenges and built the democratic edifice that is in many ways unparalleled.
Our representative bodies embody the hopes and aspirations of the people while at the same time also serving as a platform to echo their grievances.
It is in these bodies that the people repose their faith to advance their common agenda of growth and social advancement.
While their responsiveness to public needs is assessed by the people on a continual basis, they are called to account through the medium of elections.
It is only by the conduct of free, fair and participative elections that our democracy has become in many ways, the most vibrant in the world.
The role of the Election Commission in this success has been simply outstanding.
The challenges it has had to face have been daunting.
The management of an electorate of over 716 million in 2009, that is nearly the combined population of third, fourth and fifth largest nations in the world, and over eight lakh thirty thousand polling stations is not an easy job.
The Election Commission of India deserves our appreciation for delivering to the citizens of this country, a system that ensures transparent, free and fair elections.
Its role in promoting democracy has been so efficient that it has gained global recognition as a model worthy of emulation.
I compliment the Election Commission for this laudable achievement.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Enthusiastic participation of people in the electoral process is the key to healthy democracy.
The Voter is, therefore, the central actor in any democratic election.
I am happy to note that the Election Commission of India has taken initiatives to make the process of enrolment easier and convenient, and the voting experience people-friendly.
It is heartening to know that civil society organizations, the corporate sector, educational institutions, the media and many others have joined the Election Commission in this shared goal.
I am happy to see a growing excitement among the electorate to eagerly participate in elections.
The Election Commission has to not only sustain this consciousness but also strengthen it further.
The focus of this drive is on the newly eligible voters in the age group of 18-19 years.
I am confident that the numbers will be even higher this year.
Once again, I congratulate the Election Commission for undertaking the massive exercise in the earnest attempts to ensure that every eligible citizen is included in the electoral roll.
The efforts of the Commission have indeed borne good results.
It is evident in the increase in the number of voters from about 76 crore in 2012 to close to 79 crore in 2013.
I congratulate all the young voters of Delhi, who have just received their Voter Identity Cards.
I also compliment the millions of other young voters across the country, who have been similarly empowered today.
Let me remind you that you now have the power to choose your representatives.
Do exercise this power and do exercise it responsibly.
I hope all of you will use this opportunity and exercise your franchise every time in the most informed and ethical manner, free of any inducement and going beyond narrow considerations.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I am glad to have the privilege to also recognize the outstanding officers from the field, who have been bestowed the National Awards for best electoral practices.
Always bear in mind that you and the lakhs of other personnel engaged in elections management have the most crucial pivotal role in reinforcing the grids of Indian democracy.
Through increased participation, the electoral process and democracy in India will continue to grow in strength and vibrancy.
I once again compliment the Election Commission of India for all its achievements and wish them the very best for the coming years.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
My Fellow Citizens:
I convey my special greetings to members of our Armed Forces, Paramilitary Forces and Internal Security Forces.
On this day, sixty four years ago, in a remarkable display of idealism and courage, we the people of India gave to ourselves a sovereign democratic republic to secure all its citizens justice, liberty and equality.
We undertook to promote among all citizens fraternity, the dignity of the individual and the unity of the nation.
These ideals became the lodestar of the modern Indian State.
Democracy became our most precious guide towards peace and regeneration from the swamp of poverty created by centuries of colonial rule.
From within the spacious provisions of our Constitution, India has grown into a beautiful, vibrant, and sometimes noisy democracy.
For us, the democracy is not a gift, but the fundamental right of every citizen; for those in power democracy is a sacred trust.
Those who violate this trust commit sacrilege against the nation.
We do feel angry, and rightly so, when we see democratic institutions being weakened by complacency and incompetence.
If we hear sometimes an anthem of despair from the street, it is because people feel that a sacred trust is being violated.
Fellow Citizens:
If Indians are enraged, it is because they are witnessing corruption and waste of national resources.
If governments do not remove these flaws, voters will remove governments.
Elections do not give any person the licence to flirt with illusions.
Those who seek the trust of voters must promise only what is possible.
Government is not a charity shop.
Populist anarchy cannot be a substitute for governance.
False promises lead to disillusionment, which gives birth to rage, and that rage has one legitimate target: those in power.
The aspirational young Indian will not forgive a betrayal of her future.
Those in office must eliminate the trust deficit between them and the people.
Those in politics should understand that every election comes with a warning sign: perform, or perish.
It is the physician that heals itself, and 2014 must become a year of healing after the fractured and contentious politics of the last few years.
My Fellow Citizens:
The slowdown of our economy in the last two years can be some cause for concern but none for despair.
The green shoots of revival are already visible.
The agricultural growth in the first half of this year has touched 3.6 per cent and rural economy is buoyant.
We must re-discover that sense of national purpose and patriotism, which lifts the nation above and across the abyss; and back on to the road of prosperity.
Give the young jobs and they will raise the villages and cities to 21st century standards.
Give them a chance and you will marvel at the India they can create.
This year, we will witness the 16th General Election to our Lok Sabha.
A fractured government, hostage to whimsical opportunists, is always an unhappy eventuality.
In 2014, it could be catastrophic.
Each one of us is a voter; each one of us has a deep responsibility; we cannot let India down.
It is time for introspection and action.
Destiny has given us another opportunity to recover what we have lost; we will have no one to blame but ourselves if we falter.
Fellow Citizens:
This is welcome, for we solve problems through discussion and consent, not force.
But healthy differences of opinion must not lead to an unhealthy strife within our polity.
Passions are rising over whether we should have smaller states to extend equitable development to all parts of a state.
A debate is legitimate but it should conform to democratic norms.
The politics of divide and rule has extracted a heavy price on our subcontinent.
If we do not work together, nothing ever will work.
We must be open to all knowledge; to do otherwise would be to condemn our nation to the misery of a stagnant mire.
But we should not indulge in the easy option of mindless imitation, for that can lead us to a garden of weeds.
India has the intellectual prowess, the human resource and financial capital to shape a glorious future.
We possess a dynamic civil society with an innovative mindset.
Our people, whether in villages or cities, share a vibrant, unique consciousness and culture.
Our finest assets are human.
Fellow Citizens:
I am not talking only of the ancient institutions of excellence like Takshashila or Nalanda, but of an age as recent as the 17th and 18th centuries.
Today, our higher educational infrastructure consists of over 650 universities and 33,000 colleges.
The quality of education has to be the focus of our attention now.
We can be world leaders in education, if only we discover the will and leadership to take us to that pinnacle.
Education is no longer just the privilege of the elite, but a universal right.
We must usher in an education revolution that becomes a launching pad for the national resurgence.
Because, the human mind flourishes best when it is, as the great sage Rabindranath Tagore said, free from fear; when it has the liberty to roam into spheres unknown; in search of wisdom; and when the people have the fundamental right to propose as well as oppose.
My Fellow Citizens:
Who wins the coming election is less important than the fact that whosoever wins must have an undiluted commitment to stability, honesty, and the development of India.
Our problems will not disappear overnight.
We live in a turbulent part of the world where factors of instability have grown in the recent past.
Communal forces and terrorists will still seek to destabilize the harmony of our people and the integrity of our state but they will never win.
Our security and armed forces, backed by the steel of popular support, have proved that they can crush an enemy within; with as much felicity as they guard our frontiers.
Mavericks who question the integrity of our armed services are irresponsible and should find no place in public life.
1950 saw the birth of our Republic.
I am sure that 2014 will be the year of resurgence.
Jai Hind!
It gives me great pleasure to be here today for the presentation of the National Awards instituted by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation.
These Awards recognize outstanding contribution in alleviating poverty and improving housing infrastructure for the urban poor through missions and schemes of this Ministry.
I hope the benchmarks that they have set will spur others to uplift their efforts.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Cities have become engines of growth and centres of innovation.
At the same time, cities have also been subjected to tremendous pressure due to migration, social inequality, civic infrastructure inequity and environmental pollution.
Slum dwellers live in abysmal conditions and are deprived of essential civic amenities.
The challenges confronting our cities are daunting, yet surmountable.
I applaud the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation for designing and rolling out innovative policies and programmes aimed at bridging the gap in urban housing through increased housing access for the urban poor.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The traditional income and consumption parameters are inadequate to fully capture the nature of deprivation.
The homeless and slum-dwellers are exposed to residential vulnerability.
Those lacking in skill training and formal education and those having uncertain wages, and unsanitary, undignified and oppressive work conditions suffer from occupational vulnerability.
Gender, age, disability and social stratification give rise to social vulnerability.
It is heartening to note that the schemes of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation resonate with this vulnerability framework.
The Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) is focused on tackling residential vulnerability; Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) and now the National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM) on occupational vulnerability; and the Rajiv Awas Yojana is geared to address residential, occupational and social vulnerabilities.
This scheme espouses the innovative features of gender and community empowerment as well as the provision of mortgageable rights.
I am pleased to learn about the steps taken to promote slum free city planning to ensure efficient implementation of the scheme objectives.
While lauding the cities that have completed the plans, I urge the rest to also follow this novel initiative.
I also call upon the states and cities to step up their community mobilization efforts under this scheme.
The use of local materials and energy and cost efficient building technologies can lead to a paradigm shift in low cost housing.
I am hopeful of such practices being encouraged more while administering the projects.
I am told that the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation has recognized the demand side challenges in urban poor housing.
The Credit Risk Guarantee Fund and schemes such as Rajiv Rinn Yojana seeks to improve affordability through formal housing finance for the urban poor.
The SJSRY scheme and now the NULM have to be leveraged properly for true empowerment of the urban poor.
I am confident that tapping the policies and programmes effectively can lead to substantial improvement in provision of housing and basic services in the urban sector.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Between 2000 and 2010, nearly 200 million people have been lifted out of slums, out of which, India accounts for thirty per cent.
I hope the proactive measures being taken will mitigate this further and enable us to move towards a Slum Free India.
If the people residing in cities are bogged down by lack of basic amenities, they will be unable to unleash their full potential; to pursue creative efforts.
We have to enable people to make their best contribution.
Everyone has to partake the benefits that a city provides.
Otherwise, we will fall short of success in our endeavours.
Our policies and schemes have to continue with vigour till that goal is achieved.
Let cities be the harbinger of progress and prosperity in the country.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
It is my privilege to be here today for the inauguration of the Conference of Vice Chancellors of Agricultural Universities, Directors of Institutes of Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) and Progressive Farmers.
I thank Shri Sharad Pawar, Union Minister of Agriculture and Food Processing Industries, for inviting me to this important Conference.
I am glad to have this opportunity to address a distinguished gathering of public leaders, agriculture research managers, scientists and educationists.
This annual Conference is part of an effort to institutionalize the interface between key partners in agricultural research, education and extension.
I compliment the organizers for undertaking this initiative.
I applaud the efforts of all the stakeholders who have been instrumental in bringing about the visible change.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We had inherited an under-developed agricultural system in 1947.
We were a net food importer to the tune of an average 3 million tonne per year between 1946 and 1952.
Due to the vision of our policy makers, ingenuity of our agricultural scientists and the industry of our farmers, India became self-sufficient in food grains.
We have produced 255 million tonne of food grains in 2012-13 after setting a record of 259 million tonne in the previous year.
Healthy agricultural growth has improved food security along with nutritional security.
The livelihood security of an incredibly large number of farm families is linked to agriculture.
85 per cent of small and marginal farmers derive their livelihood from this sector.
To make farming more remunerative and to transform farmers into agriprenuers, research innovations for low cost technologies, machines and tools are necessary.
This year has been declared by the United Nations as the International Year of Family Farming.
This is the time to stimulate active policies for sustainable development of agricultural systems based on farmer families and cooperatives.
Programmes such as Bringing Green Revolution to Eastern India and National Food Security Mission have already provided the much needed boost to productivity of major crops in several states.
I am sure the thrust to increased agricultural productivity will continue.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It has completed almost eight and half decades of meritorious service.
Through technological solutions, it has placed Indian agriculture on a firm footing.
It has to now focus on emerging issues like climate change, natural resource degradation, appearance of new host-parasite complex, concerns for bio-safety, restrictive trade regimes, competitiveness of farm produce, improvement in farm income, shift in the consumption pattern towards processed food, and increased demand for food items of animal origin.
I have full faith in our institutions, scientists and farmers to convert these challenges into opportunities.
The net sown area in our country has stabilized at around 140 million hectares.
At the same time, there are large tracts of wastelands.
Newer technologies are required to bring such land under productive use.
Harnessing modern biology in agriculture is the need of the hour.
Such technologies to conserve resources through increased input-use efficiency have to be pursued vigorously.
The institutes of ICAR and agricultural universities have to strengthen their programmes to produce quality seeds, with an emphasis on improving the seed replacement rate in crops.
In a scenario of rising energy costs, it is vital to enhance energy-use efficiency.
At the same time, in the context of growing scarcity of farm labour, it is critical to leverage farm mechanization.
Development of better hybrids, rejuvenation of old orchards, pest and nutrient management, post-harvest management and protected cultivation are steps necessary for the development of horticulture crops.
To build resistance to biotic and abiotic stresses in such crops, hybrid technology has to be developed.
Such technology can also promote hybrids in rice, maize, sunflower, pearl millet and cotton, resulting in significant productivity gains in all these products.
The development of food processing sector can be a vital link between industry and agriculture.
Greater investment in infrastructure, marketing, storage and transportation has to be made.
More research on food processing, cold chains, handling, and packaging of processed food has to be undertaken.
Development of transgenic crop varieties having the novel traits of insect resistance, herbicide tolerance and hybrid production has led to significant cultivation of Genetically Modified crops.
These crops presently occupy 170 million hectares in 28 developed and developing countries.
In India, Bt-Cotton has boosted cotton production and enhanced its export earnings.
We have to pursue these new technologies for the benefits they provide.
At the same time, public concerns have to be addressed through increased awareness and biotechnology education.
A greater understanding of market intelligence mechanisms, good trade practices, and legal aspects of the multilateral trade regime and intellectual property rights is absolutely necessary.
This calls for the development and institutionalization of user-friendly knowledge systems to support decision-making by various client groups.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Agricultural education has to be in the forefront of building a scientific base for research and extension.
Our agricultural universities have to play an important role in imparting quality education to students, making them professionally competent and socially sensitive.
To harmonize agricultural education with excellence in science and technology, they have to undertake initiatives aimed at faculty and institution development, and reforms in governance and curriculum.
I am pleased to learn that ICAR has initiated the National Agricultural Education Project to improve and sustain the quality of higher agricultural education.
It has also contemplated innovative student programmes such as READY, which stands for Rural Entrepreneurship and Awareness Development Yojana; ASPIRE, or Agriculture Science Pursuit for Inspired Research Excellence, and ARYA, or Attracting and Retaining Youth in Agriculture.
The KVK model has to use its multi-disciplinary approach effectively to provide training and demonstration support to farmers.
I am happy to have been a part of the inauguration of a new campus of the KVK and a technology exhibition at Baramati, earlier today.
I am confident that your deliberations here will help to identify common areas of collaboration and to harness synergies to make Indian agriculture more robust.
The billion plus countrymen have great expectations from you.
On your success, their future depends.
I wish all of you effective and productive deliberations during the Conference.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Abstract
The establishment of Parliamentary Democracy in India at independence was a momentous step in the history of the new nation emerging from a long period of colonialism.
Although Parliamentary Democracy in a newly independent nation was thought to be of great risk, Nehru played a central role in making the process a success.
His vision transformed the limited representative government given by the British into a vibrant and powerful institutionalised structure suited for the citizens of India.
Nehru was a firm believer in freedom of thought and expression and participation of the people in the governance of the country.
For Nehru, democracy and civil liberties were not merely a means for bringing about economic and social development, but, absolute values and ends in themselves.
He also believed that the establishment of a strong and stable parliamentary system during the difficult formative years of nation-building in our country was also very essential.
It was due to the strong leadership and liberal values provided by Nehru, that Parliamentary Democracy has taken root and survived in India.
The enduring rules, values and conventions laid down by him enabled the democratic institution in India to shape and function.
Over the years, Parliament as an institution has constantly introduced changes and new rules which have allowed it to move ahead, but the strong legacy of functioning in democratic and scientific temperament laid down by Nehru at independence has made this institution unique.
I am happy to visit the prestigious Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) of New Delhi today and I deem it an honour to have been invited to deliver the Tenth Nehru Memorial Lecture.
It is recognised as the home of the intellectually restless, insatiably curious and mentally rigorous.
It stands for the onward march of the human race towards ever higher objectives.
JNU is amongst the first Universities in the country to emphasize the interdisciplinary approach in teaching and research and introduce the semester system, credit and grading system, 100 per cent internal examination and evaluation system as well as a dynamic admission policy.
Its research and extra curricular life has been always imbued with social purpose and been of relevance to the problems of society.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru was the prime architect of modern India and her system of Parliamentary Democracy.
Nehru had an abiding faith in the parliamentary process which for him meant a responsible and responsive political system which governs through consultation and discussion.
Nehru was a firm believer in freedom of thought and expression.
Democracy and civil liberties were for him absolute values, ends in themselves, and not merely a means for bringing about economic and social development.
The establishment of full Parliamentary Democracy in India was thus a momentous step in the history of a new nation emerging from a long period of colonialism.
Nehru played a central role in shaping the process by which the limited representative government given by the British was transformed into vibrant and powerful institutions that suited the genius of the Indian people.
The road to the Constitution
Unlike in many other countries, the Constitution of India was not made by the departing colonial power.
In the Constituent Assembly, many speakers argued for adoption of the parliamentary system pointing out that several generations of Indians were schooled in it and this collective experience could not be ignored.
But others had doubts and voiced them stridently.
Some feared a majoritarian electoral dispensation in a polity that was deeply divided and preferred a fixed-term executive.
The Gandhians in the Assembly were keen that an indigenous system based on Village Republics be adopted, but their ideas were sought to be accommodated in other parts of the Constitution.
Nehru was however not swayed by these arguments and believed that Parliamentary Democracy confirmed to our history and traditions and was best suited to enable India build a united and integrated nation from a highly pluralistic society with divisive pulls of different kinds.
The democratic ethos of the people of India
Nehru tried to visualise and evolve the most appropriate structure of governance for India keeping in mind the nature of Indian society and its long history, spread over several millennia.
The process of nation-formation, Nehru said, could be strengthened by recognising the urges and aspirations of Indian people inhabiting different parts of the country with their rich, diverse culture and linguistic heritage.
Given its diversity and differences only a democratic structure which gives freedom to various cultural, political, and socio-economic tendencies to express themselves could hold India together.
The need to educate people in democracy
At the same time, Nehru was realistic and recognized that Parliamentary Democracy was not something which could be consolidated overnight.
It had to evolve and grow.
It had to be absorbed by the people and demanded a great deal of investment in their political education.
Nehru took pains to explain to the masses the implications of various forces working within and outside the country and international developments.
He explained the logic behind important decisions through his speeches and addresses both inside and outside Parliament.
Nehru believed that all programmes and policies of the Government must be properly debated, understood, evaluated and then accepted.
He sought to create a consensus on major issues so that people felt motivated and involved in the task of building the nation and in safeguarding its freedom and democratic institutions.
He firmly believed that individuals had the best opportunity for self-growth as well as to serve others only in a democratic polity.
Democracy promoted self-discipline and social responsibility.
System which is responsible and responsive
Nehru believed that Parliamentary Democracy had the ability to mobilize the masses and involve them in the task of development and nation-building.
The government remains both responsible to the people 24/7 and is also responsive to their wishes and demands at all times.
An intimate relationship is forged between government and the people through Parliament.
Nehru also believed Parliamentary Democracy would best contribute to the establishment of economic democracy and the achieving of the goals set out in the Preamble to the Constitution, namely justice-social, economic and political.
Respect for Parliamentary Etiquette
Nehru treated Parliament with great respect and was often seen sitting patiently through long and often boring debates as an example to his colleagues and young parliamentarians.
He spoke frequently in Parliament, and used it as a forum to disseminate his views to the public.
Despite the majority enjoyed by the Congress Party, he ensured that the Parliament always reflected the will of the entire people.
Even when he was quite ill during the last few months of his life, he did not miss any session and would even insist on rising to his feet whenever he had to speak, to maintain the decorum of the house.
Letters from Members of Parliament was invariably replied personally and promptly.
Providing information to the Parliament
Nehru promoted frank discussions on subjects of importance in the Houses of Parliament.
He did not appreciate the use of public interest as a reason to deny information to the Parliament and sometimes intervened to give information which the concerned Minister may have denied.
He was willing to share a great deal of information even on matters like defence and foreign policy.
As Foreign Minister, he made it a point to have discussions from time to time on the international situation and he would often himself move motions in the House that a particular international development be taken into consideration.
The result was that foreign policy debates in the Indian Parliament attracted wide attention not just in India but also in the world outside.
In Delhi, foreign affairs debates were eagerly awaited and large number of diplomats and media would throng the galleries on the day of such debates.
Nehru was aware that the lack of an established Opposition meant significant weakness in the system.
He also felt that the lack of experience and independent thinking among the large majority of backbenchers required remedial action.
Nehru opposed the banning of the Communist Party even though he was against its policies.
He wanted that it should be countered by normal legal processes.
Nehru frequently met Opposition leaders to exchange ideas on crucial issues.
He would compliment those who made good speeches and raised important issues.
He maintained good personal relations with many Opposition members and never failed in showing them courtesy and consideration.
Nehru constantly asked his Ministers to welcome probing questions and debates.
Rights and Privileges and Question Hour
Nehru was attentive to the need to preserve and protect the rights and privileges of members.
He was particular that the dignity and prestige of the House should be maintained at all times.
He also sat through most of the debates on major issues and listened to members with attention.
He would intervene and answer any difficult question and conclude or sum up a debate at any point with effortless ease.
Critical role of Elections
Nehru had tremendous faith in the capacity of poor, unlettered people to understand issues and exercise reasoned choices.
He did not use the excuse of the partition of the country and the consequent communal violence or influx of refugees to postpone elections.
On the contrary, he was impatient to go to the people and unhappy that elections could not be held earlier.
He constantly educated the people about the value of adult suffrage and their duty to discharge their right to vote with responsibility.
In the first general elections, over a million officials were involved.
173 million voters were registered through a house-to-house survey.
Three-quarters of those eligible were illiterate.
Elections were spread out over 6 months, from October 1951 to March 1952, and candidates of 77 political parties, apart from some independents, contested in 3,772 candidates in 489 constituencies.
Challenges of Parliamentary Democracy
It is well known that despite the solid foundation laid by Nehru, Parliamentary Democracy in India faces numerous challenges.
There has been widespread criticism of constant disruption of proceedings, low level of attendance and debate, unruly behaviour, shrinking in the number of days that the Parliament meets and the irresponsible manner in which important legislation including the Budget gets passed with hardly any discussion.
Let me add some thoughts on the Lokpal Bill and the run up to its adoption by Parliament.
The Lokpal Bill has a chequered history.
It was introduced as many as eight times in the Lok Sabha and considered at various stages.
It was passed many times and referred to various committees.
Finally, during the NDA Government, the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs headed by me scrutinized and recommended the Bill to Home Ministry for consideration of passage.
From the 1970s, the people of India have wanted the Lokpal to become a reality.
When Shri Anna Hazare started his agitation for a strong Lokpal, he received support from a wide spectrum of society.
No responsible and responsive government could ignore the huge public upsurge in support of the Lokpal Bill.
That is why the Government decided to depute five senior ministers to sit down with five representatives chosen by Shri Anna Hazare and finalize a draft bill for introduction in Parliament.
The agitation for the Lokpal Bill thus showed that civil society can also take the lead in initiating legislation.
For the first time in Indian politics, legislation ceased to be the exclusive prerogative of federal or state legislatures.
Civil society demonstrated that they play an important and effective role in the legislative process and a new dimension was added to parliamentary politics.
Lessons from Nehru
For Nehru, people were always at the heart of our political system.
Leaders and the political class exist to serve people and not the other way around.
In a democracy, the Parliament is the primary instrument of good governance and social economic transformation.
Parliamentarians should treat it with the deference it deserves and at the same time, recognize its potential.
Our Parliamentarians and legislators must see the opportunity provided to represent the people as a great privilege and honour.
Parliamentarians must at all times be sensitive and responsive to the problems and concerns of the people.
In a letter to Lady Mountbatten on December 3, 1951, Nehru revealed his passion for people and modern day Parliamentarians would do well to learn from it.
Scenes from past history of that very part of India rise up before me and my mind becomes a picture gallery of past events.
But, more than the past, the present fills my mind and I try to probe into the minds and hearts of these multitudes.
Having long been imprisoned in the Secretariat of Delhi, I rather enjoy these fresh contacts with the Indian People.
Secondly, disruption of proceedings cannot and should not be tolerated under any circumstance.
Dissent should be expressed with decency and within the contours and parameters of parliamentary devices.
Figures are available for the time lost due to interruptions/adjournments from the Tenth Lok Sabha (1991-96) onwards.
It is most unfortunate that time wasted as result of disruptions has been steadily going up over the last two decades.
Thirdly, discipline and decorum must be always maintained and rules, conventions and etiquette observed.
Parliamentary practices, procedures and conventions are meant to provide for orderly and expeditious transaction of business of the House.
Once when a Member of Parliament indulged in conduct unbecoming of the House, Nehru himself moved a motion for the appointment of a parliamentary committee to look into the matter, even though the Member belonged to the Congress.
Fourthly, there has to be mutual respect and cooperation across political boundaries.
The minority must accept with grace the decisions of the majority.
The majority in turn must respect and to the best extent, accommodate the views of the minority.
The cardinal principle of effective functioning of the Parliamentary system is that majority will rule and minority will oppose, expose and if possible, depose.
But, this process must take place within the ambit of Parliamentary conventions and procedure.
Every legislator should ensure that the content and the quality of debates that take place in the chambers are of the highest order.
As members of different political Parties, individual Parliamentarians would be guided by the policies of their respective Parties.
Competitive politics should not however result in slowing down the progress of the country or enhancing the suffering of its people.
Most issues of development and public welfare transcend political barriers.
It should not be difficult to forge consensus on such issues.
Finally, Parliamentarians must see legislation as their first and foremost responsibility.
It is most unfortunate that time devoted towards legislation has been gradually declining across the country.
To illustrate, the first Lok Sabha from 1952-57 had 677 sittings in which 319 bills were passed.
In comparison, the fourteenth Lok Sabha from 2004-2009 had only 332 sittings and passed just 247 bills.
There is, in particular, need for utmost caution in matters of legislation, money and finance.
It must be kept in mind that no expenditure can be incurred by the Executive without approval of the Parliament.
No tax can be levied except by a law passed by the Parliament and no money can be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of the State without the approval of the Parliament.
No one who holds any elected office, including me, has been invited by the voters to occupy that office.
Each one has gone to the voters and pleaded for their votes and support.
The trust placed by the people in the political system and those elected should not be betrayed.
Conclusion
Parliamentary Democracy in the Nehruvian era had many distinct features.
There was stability and legitimacy in the polity due to the tall leadership of Nehru and the dominant position of the Congress party.
The House had many members from the national movement who shared with Nehru a common vision of nation-building and the role of Parliament in this venture.
There was a shared political culture among not only among Congressmen but also the Opposition as many groups had emerged from within the Congress.
Due to this political culture, it was easy to consolidate Parliamentary Democracy in the early years.
Nehru believed that democracy was something deeper than voting, elections or a political form of government.
Through Parliamentary Democracy, Nehru forged us into a nation and made us strong and self-reliant in our thinking.
Nehru knew that Parliamentary Democracy imposed on members of Parliament formidable obligations and was the most difficult system of governance as well as one of the most exacting applied sciences.
The establishment of a strong and stable parliamentary system by Nehru enabled India consolidate itself in the difficult formative years of nation-building in our country.
The success of Parliamentary Democracy in India, which we tend to take for granted, was the exception and not the rule in many newly independent nations.
India inherited institutions from the British period, adapted it to her own needs and firmly established functioning and effective parliamentary institutions as a way of life.
Parliamentary Democracy taking firm root and flourishing in India was to a large extent due to the strong leadership provided by Nehru.
The question that confront us however is how we modern day Indians can live up to that legacy and make it a reality.
As the elections to the Parliament approaches us, this University can lead the way in building intellectual opinion that creates a congenial climate for a return to the spirit and practice of the Nehruvian days.
Democracy has given us an opportunity to re-create another golden age.
Let us not squander this extraordinary opportunity.
Thank you,
Jai Hind.
Honourable Ministers,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It gives me immense pleasure to welcome Your Excellency and your distinguished delegation to India.
It is indeed a matter of satisfaction that your State Visit is taking place at a time when our countries are celebrating the fortieth year of our diplomatic relations.
Our shared commitment to democracy and the rule of law - and the importance that we attach to upholding civil liberties and human rights are at the very foundation of the strategic partnership that we have today.
Your visit to India within the first year of your Presidency, signals to us your commitment to take this mutually advantageous relationship to a new level of understanding and co-operation.
The industrious Korean people have been able to overcome all odds and rise from the devastation of war to realize their impressive economic potential.
Today the Republic of Korea is the 4th largest economy in Asia.
The philosophy of the Buddha has enriched the discourse between them.
The travelogue of the respected Korean monk Hyecho gave us a valuable insight into the India of the 8th Century.
Similarly, Indian companies and banks are investing and establishing themselves with good results in the Republic of Korea.
Our growing linkages are being built on the complementarities of our economies that reinforce each other.
We value the presence and progress of Korean enterprises in India.
We are also glad to see the recent expansion in cultural, academic and other people-to-people exchanges between our two countries.
We both are determined to work for peace, stability and growth in our respective regions - and in Asia as a whole.
India looks forward to intensifying our joint efforts to build on our mutual goodwill and growing synergies to further strengthen our relationship.
I have no doubt that the areas of decisions taken and initiatives announced today will accelerate our co-operation and add content and substance to our Strategic Partnership for the mutual benefit of our peoples.
- to the health and success of Her Excellency, President Madame Park Geun-hye;
- to the progress and prosperity of the people of the Republic of Korea; and
- to the enduring friendship between India and the Republic of Korea.
It is with great joy and happiness that I visit the Andaman and Nicobar Islands once again.
Each visit is an opportunity to pay homage to our freedom fighters who in this hallowed territory underwent great hardship and suffering to secure our independence.
Our National Memorial, the Cellular Jail bears testimony to the sacrifices made by them.
It stands as a symbol of the burning patriotism of many freedom fighters who spent their youthful lives here in incarceration.
Its unique and cohesive multi-cultural, multi-linguistic society sets an example to the rest of the country.
The immense beauty and splendour of these islands, its rich forest and marine wealth, coastal flora and fauna, along with beaches of extraordinary beauty are a natural marvel.
The maritime activities of Britain eclipsed this idyllic situation.
The islands, surveyed by Lieutenant Archibald Blair two hundred years ago, went under the British in the shape of the first settlement at Port Cornwallis.
Neither letting the people free to live their lives nor helping them to progress, the British chose to convert the islands into a penal colony.
Patriots like Bareendra Nath Ghose, Veer Savarkar and Trailokya Maharaj, who had dared to challenge the might of the Empire were brought her and confined in the Cellular jail.
Andaman and Nicobar Islands has an important place in the history of our struggle for freedom.
Netaji arrived in the Andamans on 29 December 1943 to take over the Andaman and Nicobar Islands from the Japanese Navy.
He stayed in the abandoned residence of the British Chief Commissioner on Ross Island.
He hoisted the National Tricolor in the Gymkhana Grounds on 30 December 1943.
He also visited the Cellular Jail.
He flew back to Bangkok enroute to Rangoon on 1st January 1944.
Netaji appointed Col. A.G. Loganadan, the Chief Commissioner of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
Col. Loganadan along with four other INA officers arrived in Port Blair on 11 February 1944 and established the Azad Hind Government in the Andamans.
The Andaman and Nicobar Islands are the home of some of our most precious tribal communities.
Progress must come to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands but it must come with deference to the people, their traditions and the ecology.
People working amongst the tribals must take up the task of development with a spirit of dedication as well as a spirit of understanding and sympathy.
Living in such close proximity to nature makes these Islands and its people vulnerable to various kinds of natural disasters such as earthquakes, tsunami and cyclones.
I visited Andaman and Nicobar Islands soon after the Tsunami of 2004 and witnessed the destruction and devastation that had occurred here.
It is the resilience of the people of these Islands that enabled with the support of the Government the successful completion of the mammoth task of reconstruction and rehabilitation.
The Administration with the co-operation of the people was able to effectively deal with these disasters.
I am happy to know that the Andaman and Nicobar Administration successfully conducted recently a major Disaster Management Exercise across the islands.
I am sure such exercises will enhance our disaster preparedness considerably.
Andaman and Nicobar Islands lie at the important junction of South Asia and South East Asia.
These islands are only a couple of hundred kilometres from South East Asia.
The location of a dedicated tri-Service command highlights the strategic position of these islands from the view point of the defence of India.
Further, around 30 percent of India's Exclusive Economic Zone and concomitant marine resources are around these Islands.
These Islands are not only the maritime gateway to the Bay of Bengal but also overlook major international sea routes.
These islands have the potential to be a spring board for India's engagement with South East Asia and the Pacific region.
They can be developed as a significant trading, shipping and tourist hub.
The location of Andamans a thousand miles away from the mainland and the fact that they are spread over 750 kilometres in the Bay of Bengal has implications in terms of security, connectivity and supply of resources and materials.
This in turn constrains economic growth and employment opportunities.
I am aware of the steps beings taken by the Administration to improve infrastructure and transport, such as, acquisition of new ships, expansion of air services and projects for telecommunication connectivity.
The Government of India will provide every support necessary to the people and administration of Andaman and Nicobar in these efforts.
Our goal has to be to promote sustainable and inclusive growth while being sensitive to the fragile eco system and concerns of our indigenous tribes.
I am confident that all of you will be able to achieve this objective under the dynamic leadership of your elected representatives and officials of the Administration.
A special word to the extremely talented children and youth of Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
You are our hope for the future.
In a rapidly transforming world, you have tremendous potential and opportunity to be agents of change.
Where there is a will, there is a way!
With hard work, courage and adherence to principles, I am sure that you will be able to take the Islands and our motherland to greater heights.
I compliment the people of Port Blair, the Port Blair Municipal Council and the Administration for their enchanting, clean and green town of Port Blair.
I also thank all of you for your warm welcome.
I am indeed touched by your affection.
Jai Hind!
It is a leading institution in our country for research, teaching and application of statistics, natural sciences and social sciences.
I thank the Institute for giving me this wonderful opportunity to address you on this happy occasion.
Friends:
In the nineteen hundred twenties, Professor Mahalanobis had a wonderful vision about the potential of statistics in creating a modern society.
He correctly identified statistics as a key tool for the progress of science and technology.
He sought to develop the statistical infrastructure in the country.
In 1931, he set up in one room of the Presidency College in Kolkata, a statistical laboratory.
This path-breaking initiative taken more than eight decades back has now become a large institution.
ISI is today reckoned as a world class academic body in theoretical and applied statistics.
I note with pride the immense contribution of this Institute in the development of statistical theory and innovative applications.
The Convocation Day, today, marks the culmination of fruitful educational experience of yet another batch of students from this Institute.
On this occasion, I see a palpable sense of joy and exhilaration in the students.
Through the sweet pain of their labour, the graduating students have fulfilled their long-held dreams and that of their well-wishers.
You, the bright future of our nation, have the potential to think differently.
Apply judiciously what you have learnt here to make a lasting contribution in the field that you have chosen to pursue.
Friends:
The modalities of carrying out business and government transactions have undergone a sea change over the last few years.
Application of data sciences and quantitative decision-making has led to a dramatic change in business and governance landscape.
It has helped in improving transparency to ensure last mile connectivity.
It has facilitated in reaching out to a large cross-section of people for wider service delivery.
Improved capacity for analyses of large data sets has also led to an improvement in weather forecasting systems.
This has resulted in greater accuracy in the predictions of severe climatic conditions.
During the occurrence of natural calamities, this has accorded us crucial elbowroom to carry out large evacuations and save precious human lives.
Efforts have been made to introduce statistical systems for estimation and control of fake Indian currency notes.
I am happy to note that ISI is involved in developing technologies and theories in the areas of cryptology and information security that are likely to have far reaching impact on national security policies.
Good policies call for good data standards.
Great emphasis must therefore be laid on the authenticity of the information gathered so as to form the basis of policy intervention.
The Collection of Statistics Act, 2008 seeks to facilitate the collection of data on several socio-economic and other parameters.
It is the collective responsibility of the citizens and the seekers of information under this Act to ensure that correct and adequate statistics is furnished.
I am sure our policies will continue to have the imprint of quality data and their sound analyses.
Friends:
The corporate sector makes extensive use of Statistics and allied subjects like Mathematics, Economics, Operations Research, Quality Management and Computer Science.
Data such as usage of social networking sites, footfalls in large retail stores, hits on websites and usage of credit cards are thoroughly analyzed for widely differing purposes like uncovering hitherto unknown consumer behaviour, assessment of risk, detection of fraudulent transactions and discovering new customer segments.
However, it is prudent to also exercise due caution in analyzing large data and drawing inferences.
Capturing unstructured data and converting them into a structured format are technically challenging problems.
They have to be pursued in an enlightened manner.
Drawing inferences call for adequate scrutiny of the theory requiring the combined knowledge of the statistician and of the subject expert.
It has led to an increase in the demand for well-trained professionals in these fields.
However, as the analytic techniques are complex, they underline the need for a great deal of expertise.
A large pool of competent statisticians in the country is necessary to support the analytical needs of the public and private sectors.
Our universities and academic institutions teaching Statistics and allied subjects must take due care to up-grade the standards of instruction.
I look upon a distinguished institution like the ISI to take the lead in transforming the academic management of this important discipline.
My dear Students:
There were a lot of hopes then and we have been successful to a great extent in realizing them.
We are today in the throes of attaining global leadership.
This is possible only through the singular contribution of all our countrymen.
For that, we must ensure each and every citizen of this country to partake the benefits of progress and prosperity.
Today, technology provides us the hope to realize this goal.
Our manpower provides us the wherewithal to create and administer the technology.
Your knowledge of economics and quality management; your ability to gather and analyze large data, can play a significant role in improving the quality of governance and public policy.
I am confident that as you move ahead, you will not only make an impact on business and technology but also will be empathetic in shaping the destiny of our nation.
We are all proud of you and nurture high hopes from you.
Be the worthy citizens of our country.
I also take this opportunity to wish everyone present here a very happy, healthy, rewarding and intellectually satisfying 2014 and beyond.
Thank You.
Jai Hind!
It gives me great pleasure to be present here for the twelfth Pravasi Bharatiya Divas.
It is also the beginning of the new year which gives rise to new hope for a better future.
I take this opportunity to wish you all a very happy and prosperous new year.
The Pravasi Bharatiya Divas is an occasion when people and Government of India renew and strengthen our bonds with the Indian diaspora.
It is also an opportunity to advance the mutually beneficial relationship between Indians within and outside the country.
On this day every year, our country acknowledges the exemplary contributions made by eminent Overseas Indians by conferring upon them the Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards.
We are honoured by the presence of the awardees at this function.
All of them have made their mark in their countries of adoption and advanced the welfare of the communities in which they live and work.
Migration, as far as India is concerned is a millennia old phenomenon.
Our doors have always remained open to migrants from abroad and our people have ventured into foreign lands from the early days of our history.
In fact, there would be few countries in the world where migration, both internal as well as external, has and continues to play such a major role in the economy and society.
The Indian Diaspora world wide has steadily grown in both numbers as well as importance.
Indians abroad today comprise over 25 million and are engaged in all walks of life.
Through their success and their contribution to their host countries, they have consistently brought laurels to their land of ancestry.
It is a matter of great pride to all Indians that the Overseas Indian community is respected for its work culture, discipline, and successful integration with local communities.
The greatest hallmark of the Indian diaspora is its commitment to our common cultural heritage and passion for motherland India.
The Government has over the years strengthened partnerships and institutions that enable India connect with its Diaspora comprehensively and nurture not only emotional and familial bonds, but also cultural, social and economic interests.
The Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) which assists Indians in distress abroad is an important initiative in this regard.
This has been of great help and solace to Indian workers, especially those in the Gulf countries.
Similarly, a new e-Migrate project is being rolled out in order to ensure hassle free migration of workers in the ECR category.
I congratulate the Honourable Minister for Overseas Indian Affairs, Shri Vayalar Ravi for his dynamic leadership and for spearheading these important initiatives.
It is our hope that this demographic dividend from this young population will create self-sustaining economic growth in the coming years.
The substantial growth rate that our country has achieved over the last few years is second only to China in the world.
If we have to attain a growth rate of 9 per cent per year, as has been envisaged during the Twelfth Five Year Plan period, we must put in place enabling factors, most prominent of which is education.
I believe that education is the alchemy that can bring India its next golden age.
The success we achieve in educating our people will determine how fast India joins the ranks of leading nations of the world.
As Visitor to all Central Universities, IITs and NITs, I have been travelling the length and breadth of our country pointing out that India needs world class universities and has not produced a single Nobel Prize winner from India since Sir CV Raman.
I have been urging our educational institutions to invest more in research and development and to pursue greater international linkages by establishing collaborations with foreign Universities and inviting the best of faculty from across the world to come and teach in our institutions.
Over the last nine years, the Government has prioritised higher education and supported it with increased resources.
Enrolment to higher education institutions in the country has increased, from 1.39 crores in 2006-07 to 2.18 crores in 2011-12.
India has today 659 degree awarding institutions and 33,023 colleges.
However, despite significant growth in the number of higher education institutions, we have few institutions of global standards.
But, that was not the case in the past.
Famed seats of higher learning like Takshashila, Nalanda, Vikramashila, Valabhi, Somapura and Odantapuri were a magnet for scholars across the world.
We must lead our institutions into the ranks of the best such institutions in the world.
Friends, in a world marked by increasing constraints on natural resources, innovation will be the key to future growth.
China and the US are amongst the countries at the forefront of innovation with over 5 lakh patent applications filed by each country in 2011.
In contrast to this, India filed only 42,000 patent applications, which is far behind these countries.
India ranks 12th amongst top 20 countries, in terms of publications on science and technology.
We have only 119 researchers in R & D per million people, as compared to 715 in China and 468 in United States.
Out of the total student strength of 71,000 in NITs, there are only 4000 Ph.D. students.
This situation must change.
Our leadership in fields such as science and technology is incumbent on the level of competence in our scientists, academics, engineers and doctors.
Our growth will increasingly depend on the amount of technology up-gradation we can achieve.
Overseas Indians such as all of you gathered here can play a major role in supporting and supplementing the efforts of the Government to remedy this situation.
It might interest you to know that in my capacity as Visitor, I have been urging our Universities and NITs to set up Innovation Clubs and establish linkages with grassroots innovators, providing them the necessary institutional support to commercialize their innovations.
Similarly, during my visit to Belgium and Turkey last year, I took along with me a delegation of Vice Chancellors of Central Universities as well as the UGC Chairman.
This was perhaps the first time ever that University Vice Chancellors accompanied the Head of State on a foreign visit.
The intention was to highlight to foreign interlocutors as well as domestic stakeholders our renewed focus on taking higher education in India to world class standards.
During the visit, the Vice Chancellors held discussions with their counter parts and many MoUs were concluded on future cooperation with leading Universities of these two countries.
Friends, overseas Indians can play an extremely important role in helping the education institutions of India, most of which are their Alma Maters, rise to world class status.
They can be catalysts in transforming our higher education institutions and instilling in them a culture of excellence as well as the spirit of innovation.
I call upon all of you to take up this task in a single minded manner.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that each one of you can play an important role in the growth and development of India.
Whether you are scholars scientists, professionals, businessmen and or even workers, you have within you experience, expertise and knowledge gained as a result of your life abroad which can be of immense benefit to India.
Many of you can also play a role in guiding to India greater foreign direct investment and in educating your colleagues and friends abroad of the business opportunities that exist in India.
As the Prime Minster pointed out yesterday, our economic fundamentals remains strong and India is re-emerging as an attractive investment destination.
I am sure you have confidence in the inherent resilience of our people and the dynamism of our economy which has the ability to overcome temporary downturns.
The Government on its part will continue to actively engage with the overseas Indian community and explore all possible avenues to make them valued partners in the building of a strong and prosperous India.
I wish all of you every success in your life and future endeavors.
India looks upon you with affection, pride, satisfaction and hope.
Thank You.
Jai Hind!
Vice Chancellors of universities, Directors of Indian Institutes of Technology and National Institutes of Technology, Heads of other academic institutions; faculty members; my dear students:
It is with great pleasure that I speak to you in the New Year.
Throughout 2013, I have been closely interacting with various academic institutions.
In February 2013, a Conference of Vice Chancellors of Central Universities and in November, a Conference of Directors of National Institutes of Technology were held in Rashtrapati Bhavan.
So far, I have visited and addressed over 45 institutions including universities, IITs and NITs.
Friends:
My first and foremost concern is the quality of education in our country.
The standard of higher education has a direct relationship with the development of a nation and the quality of life of its citizens.
Two recent surveys conducted by reputed international organizations have brought out the difference in the standards of education between institutions in India and abroad.
None of the Indian universities find any place in the top two hundred institutions.
They were visited by knowledge seekers from round the world.
But now, many bright Indian students go abroad for higher studies.
Nobel laureates Har Gobind Khorana, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, Amartya Sen and Venkatraman Ramakrishnan did their graduate or post-graduate studies inIndian universities before they went abroad to pursue higher learning.
What we need today are more collaborative partnerships on cutting edge technology, better linkage with industry and greater incentivization through scholarships.
This will not only encourage meritorious students to do research but also attract talent from foreign universities.
In a country of over 1.2 billion people, only eight Indians have so far won the Nobel Prize.
This country is eager to see an increase in the number.
I am sure it will come from amongst you.
Friends:
But, physical infrastructure alone will count for nothing unless it is matched by the quality of human capital that comprises the academic community.
The faculty, to be of a high order, must keep themselves abreast with the latest developments.
To bring about qualitative changes in teaching, the institutions must arrange a common platform of resources to be used by all faculty members for skill enhancement and knowledge gathering.
The National Knowledge Network offers an effective solution to the academic institutions to connect, collaborate and disseminate ideas, views, findings and research innovations.
Our institutions have to accord due seriousness to the university rankings process.
A higher rank can boost the morale of the academic and the student communities.
It will also help in opening fresh avenues of growth and placement for students.
Better rankings will also encourage a greater flow of faculty and students from abroad, opening new vistas of frontier technology.
Friends:
They are such teachers who make their students appreciate a subject from a wider perspective and encourage them to explore beyond the frontiers of the discipline.
By their own example, they instill good moral values in their students.
These teachers must be encouraged to share their wisdom, thoughts and experience with the larger academic community.
My dear students:
Your preparedness in life should be on the foundation of essential values of patriotism, compassion, tolerance, integrity and equality.
The extent of our progress will be decided by your energy, drive, initiative and industry.
Understand our nation and its institutions.
Read, learn and formulate views on national issues.
Choose to engage with our beautiful, complex, often difficult and sometimes noisy democracy.
Understand your rights and duties well, especially towards those who are less fortunate.
The voiceless deserve your voice; the weak deserve your strength; and the needy deserve your help.
Make the best use of your knowledge in the service of the nation and its citizens.
It is time for new beginnings.
The air is thick with hope and expectation.
Let this be a year of new opportunities and achievements.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Your Excellency, President Abdulla Yameen Abdul Gayoom,
President of the Republic of Maldives,
Madame Fathimath Ibrahim,
Shri Mohammad Hamid Ansari, Vice President of India,
Dr. Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India,
Distinguished Guests from the Republic of Maldives and
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is, indeed, a great pleasure to welcome Your Excellency and your delegation this evening.
I am particularly delighted to meet you and personally congratulate you on your recent election.
They are based on the cultural, linguistic and commercial relations that have bound our societies over the centuries.
The Indian Ocean that connects us has nurtured the close people to people ties and wide-ranging cooperation that we have today for the mutual benefit of our respective peoples.
Our special and privileged relations have been consolidated by regular high-level exchanges.
Your visit and your engagements with our Government today have, no doubt, further reinforced our long-standing friendship and understanding.
I am confident that both sides have been able to take this opportunity to thoroughly review our ongoing work and renew our commitment to achieving our common goals in the years to come.
The recent Presidential elections and the smooth transition of power in Maldives is a testimony to the strengthening of democracy in your country.
India appreciates the efforts of the political leadership in the Maldives in ensuring a free and fair electoral process and a constructive outcome.
We compliment your endeavours and your determination to take Maldives towards progress and prosperity.
Today, Maldives has earned the respect of the world for its achievements in the socio-economic sphere and for its leadership on issues such as climate change and protection of the environment.
We both have had to address the challenges of piracy, smuggling, extremism and religious fundamentalism.
India remains fully cognizant of the needs of Maldives in dealing with these issues and we are committed to assist in achieving the defence and security objectives of the Government of Maldives.
We are natural partners in this enterprise.
At a regional level, we can do much more to enhance cooperation among the States to achieve better maritime domain awareness and increase coordination and surveillance by them.
We have always been happy to extend our support and assistance, as and when required, to Maldives and we shall be happy to do so in the years to come.
We have noted, with satisfaction, the positive outcome of grants that we have extended and resources that we have shared for development projects in the Maldives, capacity building, education and training and the humanitarian assistance that we have been able to provide in times of unforeseen emergencies.
We look forward to our joint implementation of the initiatives announced today for the progress of the people of Maldives and the accomplishment of their developmental goals.
- to the health and success of His Excellency, President Abdulla Yameen Abdul Gayoom;
- to peace, stability, progress and prosperity of the people of Maldives; and
- to the enduring friendship between India and Maldives.
Fifty years is not a very long time in the life of an Institute, but it is long enough to reflect on where we started from, where we are today and to make plans and programmes for the future.
From that point of view, let me congratulate this Institute for reaching an important milestone while catering to the cause of tribal welfare.
This organization has provided necessary inputs to the State Government to design policies and programmes for tribal development.
The crux of those principles is human development with conservation of the rich and diverse cultural heritage of tribal society.
The notion of tribal welfare is not just about development of tribal communities through economic progress but a larger concept of lifestyle that fosters holistic living.
I am glad to note about the initiatives taken by this Institute in documenting tribal traditions and practices.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Leaders of our freedom struggle understood the utter necessity of taking every Indian on the path of socio-economic emancipation, without which political freedom was meanigless.
After Independence, the principle of equity was invoked in the Constitution to uplift the tribal population through affirmative policies.
I am told that to assist the Governor of Maharashtra in discharging Constitutional responsibilities as the guardian of Tribal Areas in the State, a Tribal Cell has been set up in the Raj Bhavan.
This pioneering step will allow renewed focus on building capacities of governing institutions working in the Tribal Areas.
At the same time, it will help safeguard the constitutional and statutory rights of the tribal people.
These committees have achieved considerable success in making the forest dwellers a major stakeholder for community-led forest plantation and conservation.
The Government of India has also enacted the Forest Rights Act to recognize the traditional rights of forest dwellers for cultivation and collection of minor forest produce.
It is gratifying to note that Mendha-Lekha, a small village of 450 people in the Gadchiroli District of Maharashtra, has become the first village in the country last year to get community forest rights for bamboo under this Act.
It has monetized this right thereby generating income for the village and the tribals.
I congratulate the Governor and the Chief Minister of Maharashtra for their personal intervention to facilitate this landmark event.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Still, many tribal blocks continue to rank low on human development indicators.
The Tribal Development Administration has to focus on human development apart from according primacy to survival issues.
There has to be coordinating mechanisms cutting across different departments and agencies to ensure effective delivery of services.
Information and Communication Technology has to be used extensively to improve the reach of schemes and programmes.
This Institute, as one of its key functions, is applying sound anthropological principles to determine the tribal characteristics of a group.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It calls for addressing the development and administration deficits in tribal areas to improve human development parameters of the tribal population.
There are a multitude of national and state level organizations working towards tribal development.
A wider convergence mechanism at the policy level is required to leverage the resources available.
This Institute must promote linkages between various research organizations working on tribal development and prioritize research areas.
The tribal customary laws must be codified to enable statutory provisions being exercised effectively for mitigating vulnerability of the tribal people to any exploitation.
Periodic assessment reports must be brought out to advice the administration on the implementation of tribal development programmes.
More institutions like yours must be nurtured.
Funds to research organizations to study tribal issues must be enhanced.
This will help systematize and prioritize tribal development planning.
I once again compliment the Tribal Research and Training Institute on this historic occasion and wish them good luck for their journey ahead.
Thank you.
I am indeed very happy to be present amidst you this morning.
This is for the second time that I have come to this National Social Science Congress.
I delivered the valedictory address at the XIX Indian Social Science Congress in 1996 at Allahabad University.
My learned friend, Prof. (Late) Basanta Sarkar, was the President of the Indian Academy of Social Sciences.
I am familiar with the Indian Academy of Social Sciences and its Indian Social Science Congress since then and value its contributions to the nation.
It is important that our country grows in harmony with Nature.
Our relations with Nature should be guided by the principles of reciprocity, limitation, cooperation and sustainability.
By limitation, I mean Planet Earth has very limited life supporting resources or attributes.
Human beings are products of evolutionary and historical processes.
So far, the desire to be master of Nature has guided human activities to a considerable extant.
This desire needs to be now replaced by the philosophy not of conquest of nature but of cooperation with Nature.
We need to evolve new paradigms of ecologically sustainable development.
On top of it, rivers are drying and there is over exploitation of ground water.
Where there is water there is life and where there is no water there is no life.
So, we need to conserve as well as replenish our water resources.
The fertility of our soil needs to be restored without further delay.
We need to change agricultural and industrial practices in order to reduce the toxicity in food, water and environment.
Conservation of bio-diversity and natural resources merits a serious consideration.
Food and energy security and sustainable use of scarce natural resources will constitute important constituents of our strategy for sustainable development.
We have recently established a National Green Tribunal under the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010.
The Tribunal provides for the effective and expeditious disposal of cases relating to environmental protection and conservation of forests and other natural resources.
This includes the enforcement of any legal right relating to environment, including providing relief and compensation for damages.
The National Ganga River Basin Authority is yet another example where we are trying institutional innovation to protect the sacred River.
The objective of the Authority is to ensure conservation of the river Ganga and to maintain environmental flows by adopting a comprehensive river basin approach.
We hope that the engagement of all stakeholders and this new approach will yield positive results.
Climate change is a threat but also a unique opportunity to work together.
As a developing country on the frontlines of climate vulnerability, India has a vital stake in the evolution of a successful, rule-based, equitable and multilateral response to climate change.
The Action Plan sets out a comprehensive response to climate change in the overall context of development, identifying measures that promote our development objectives while also yielding co-benefits for addressing climate change effectively.
The eight missions under the Action Plan cover both adaptation and mitigation, in addition to scientific research.
India intends to reduce the emissions intensity of our GDP by 20-25 percent by the year 2020 taking 2005 as the reference level.
It is worthwhile to note that policies to promote energy efficiency, and structural changes in the Indian economy have resulted in a sharp and declining energy intensity of the Indian economy.
Organisations like yours and your members can play the most vital role in guiding India onto the path of becoming an ecologically sustainable society.
I take this opportunity welcoming delegates from aboard.
I whish them a comfortable and productive stay during the period of the conference.
I am glad to inaugurate the same and hope Social Scientists from across the world will benefit from it.
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
I am delighted to be here this evening to inaugurate this Conference.
As I look at the distinguished gathering here today, I am reminded that Mumbai is home to the largest and most vibrant community of Zoroastrians in the world.
And it is with happiness that I reiterate the well known fact that whether it is in the world of business and industry, or art and letters, leading our defence forces or breaking new frontiers in the field of advanced science and technology, the Zoroastrian community in India has always extended itself and reached the highest echelons of achievement and success.
So it is no wonder that when the first Zoroastrian settlers arrived in India in the 8th Century, just as their beliefs found resonance in our own philosophy of Hindu dharma, the Zoroastrians themselves gained the acceptance of our people.
In the early days of our struggle for freedom, so many national leaders of the Zoroastrian faith came forth and led the charge against colonialism.
It is surely a matter of pride for the Zoroastrian community that they gave India several distinguished military officers.
Field Marshall Sam Manekshaw was not only the hero of the 1971 war, but also the hearts of the soldiers who he led from the front.
I would like to mention Admiral Jal Cursetji who became Chief of the Naval Staff, Air Marshal Aspy Engineer who served as the 2nd Chief of Air Staff in post independence India and more recently Air Marshall Fali H. Major.
In Mumbai, it is acknowledged that it was the Parsi community that laid the foundations of industry and the commercial and financial infrastructure that characterise this vibrant city.
With a noble philosophy that wealth should be used for advancing society, Parsi business houses have been at the forefront of building institutions of science, medicine and culture and they have also led our corporate sector in philanthropy and initiatives for social development.
A few days ago, one of the premier television channels, while celebrating its silver jubilee, decided to honour 25 Indians who are living legends due to their unparalleled achievements in their respective fields.
This is all the more commendable when we consider the small numbers of this community.
The Jiyo Parsi programme is bound to achieve desired results.
While the demographic statistics indicate that the Zoroastrian community in India is declining by about 10% every decade, I nevertheless remain optimistic that this trend can be arrested.
I have no doubt that a community that has such high literacy, talent, and discipline is bound to continue on the path of advancement and growth.
I understand that in your meetings over the next days you will reflect on the challenges facing the Zoroastrian community the world over and discuss its future.
I am certain that this will result in good initiatives that will ensure that this respected community grows in its numbers and continues to flourish and contribute to the progress of human civilization.
With these few words, I wish the World Zoroastrian Congress every success.
I take this opportunity to convey to this Congress, and through you, to the members of the Zoroastrian community in India and abroad, my best wishes for your progress and prosperity in the years to come.
Jai Hind!
It is indeed a privilege for me to present amidst you in this Sixty-Sixth Indian Chemical Engineering Congress and its inaugural session.
This is the Annual Session of the Indian Institute of Chemical Engineers (IICE).
At the outset, let me extend a warm welcome to the eminent academicians from abroad, who have come to India to participate in this prestigious event.
I also accord my best wishes to the distinguished personalities from the Indian academia and industry who have gathered in this forum.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It was converted into an Institute in 2002 and was granted full autonomy in 2004.
It was given Deemed University Status in 2008.
ICT has nurtured innumerable chemical engineers and scientists, many of whom have gone on to become heads of national level research institutions and scientific regulatory bodies, and first rate entrepreneurs.
Late Manubhai Shah, Union Cabinet Minister for Industries and Commerce in the late fifties and early sixties, was also a student of this prestigious institution.
Since its inception, activities in ICT have centred on research.
Its emphasis on development of novel green chemical technologies, materials, pharmaceuticals, energy systems and biotechnology have lend itself a unique position amongst similar institutes in the country.
With over 2,200 students, including 700 PhD students, and a high number of patents and papers per faculty, this reputed Institute is destined to achieve greater heights in technical education.
I applaud IICE for the same.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The deep linkages that the chemical industry has with the rest of the economy provide sufficient elbowroom to this crucial yet understated sector to effect major transformations.
The Indian chemical industry, at US Dollar 108 billion, is three per cent of the global market.
There is every reason, this share can rise.
This sector in India can clock an annual growth rate of fifteen per cent to become a US Dollar 290 billion industry by 2017.
A significant scale-up in spending to the global benchmark of 4 per cent is necessary.
Institutes like ICT are perfectly positioned to play a big role in research and technology development in chemical sector.
The expansion envisaged in chemical industry also underlines the need to make available an additional five million skilled professionals by 2017.
Technical institutes must be strengthened to shoulder the burden of meeting the manpower requirements.
To provide infrastructure support in the form of adequate power and water to units, the Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment Regions must be leveraged.
Investments planned in these zones must be realized on priority.
The industry must promote sustainable development by investing in technologies that safeguard the environment while stimulating growth.
They must adopt new technologies that are aimed at tackling the problem of industrial waste.
They must set targets and follow benchmarks to reduce the stress on environment.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Use of fertilizers and pesticides has for long demonstrated the capability to enhance farm yield and production.
These inputs have played a decisive role in developing the agriculture sector in the country.
Our agricultural system was under-developed at the time of Independence.
The Green Revolution in the Sixties was ushered in through multi-directional initiatives.
India soon became self-sufficient in food grains.
We are today a leading exporter of rice and wheat.
Today, our annual food grains production is over 250 million tonne.
We have to expand production levels significantly to meet the needs of a growing population.
This underlines the need to improve farm productivity.
At the same time, it highlights the need to promote balanced use of fertilizers and pesticides.
With the concerted effort of agricultural and chemical technology institutions, we will be able to achieve greater efficiency in fertilizer use.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We must cultivate this bond.
For that, we have to attract talent to this important knowledge stream.
We have to develop greater awareness about the prospects of this beautiful and enchanting field.
I am confident that this will spur greater interest in chemical science and technology in the country.
A forum like the Indian Chemical Engineering Congress, which I am proud to be a part of, will also help in engaging this sector with the community at large.
With these words, I conclude.
I wish you all a successful conduct of this event.
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
It is with the greatest respect that I pay homage to my illustrious predecessor and warmly recall his exceptional leadership.
He was the youngest President of India, serving from 1977 to 1982.
He is the only person to have been Chief Minister, Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Union Minister and President.
Dr Reddy was the first Chief Minister of united Andhra Pradesh and became Chief Minister twice.
He was elected twice as Speaker of the Lok Sabha.
He was elected Speaker the very year he entered the House.
He was also the first person to resign from the party as soon as he was elected Speaker, setting thereby an important and admirable precedent.
He believed that urgent matters should not be delayed by taking recourse to traditions and precedents.
It was during his tenure as Speaker that for the first time in the history of the Lok Sabha, the House sentenced a person to imprisonment for committing contempt of the House by shouting slogans and throwing pamphlets on the floor of the House from the Visitors' Gallery.
The establishment of the Committee on the Welfare of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes was another achievement of Dr Reddy's Speakership.
At 18, he gave up his studies to become an active participant in the nationalist struggle.
In 1938, at the age of 25 years, Dr Reddy was elected Secretary of the Andhra Pradesh Provincial Congress Committee and held that office for 10 years.
He served time with stalwarts like T. Prakasam, S. Satyamurti, K. Kamaraj and V V Giri who also influenced his thinking and activities of the future.
He was also a Member of the Indian Constituent Assembly.
From April 1949 till April 1951, he served as the Minister for Prohibition, Housing and Forests of the then Madras Province.
Distinguished Guests,
As early as 1951, he was elected President of the Andhra Pradesh Congress Committee.
Dr. Sanjeeva Reddy as Deputy Chief Minister then joined Chief Minister T. Prakasam in guiding the fortunes of Andhra in 1952.
He took on his broad shoulders the burden of finding solutions to the problems of administration and integration that arose at the birth of this state.
This experience enabled him provide effective leadership as the first Chief Minister of united Andhra Pradesh, following incorporation of Telengana into the state as part of Linguistic Reorganisation.
Dr Reddy served as Chief Minister from November 1956 to January 1960 and again for a second time from March 1962 to February 1964, thus serving for a total of over 5 years.
He devoted a major part of his life in Congress Organization and shifted seamlessly from Organisation to Government and vice versa.
He had no hesitation in giving up his Chief Ministership in 1960 on being elected President of the Indian National Congress, following Mrs Indira Gandhi.
He went on to be elected President of the Indian National Congress thrice consecutively at its Bangalore, Bhavnagar and Patna sessions from 1960 to 1962.
He is credited with giving shape to the plans for construction of the Nagarjuna Sagar, the Srisailam Project, the Sriram Sagar and the Vamsadhara projects which are, among the most important milestones in the development of this region.
If today, Andhra Pradesh is hailed as the granary of South India, much credit is due to Dr. Sanjeeva Reddy
He was greatly admired for his dignity in word and deed as well as his iron will in taking decisions and implementing them.
In 1964, he displayed high standards in public life by resigning as Chief Minister, following adverse remarks by the Supreme Court against the Government of Andhra Pradesh for not filing an affidavit in the Bus routes nationalisation case.
Dr Reddy took historic decisions on a number of important issues.
By virtue of his long years in public life and close association with leaders from all sections of opinion, Dr Reddy was able to be a steady hand at the wheel of state.
He lent distinction to the highest office of the land by his idealism and patriotism.
He often voiced disquiet over the fact that minimum standards of nutrition, clothing, shelter, medical care and education were beyond the reach of many sections of the people of India and called for determined efforts to address these deficiencies.
They remind us of the important responsibility that we have as citizens of India.
We must embrace the spirit of these guiding words as we pursue our individual goals.
I hope the people of Ananthapuramu, the people of Andhra and the people of India will honour his memory by remaining true to the values that he stood for.
I take this opportunity to extend to all of you my best wishes for your continued progress and prosperity.
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
I thank this renowned organization of professional engineers for inviting me to this annual Congress, which I am attending for the second consecutive year.
This body was envisaged as a medium for promotion of engineering and technology in the country.
The Institution of Engineers performed the prestigious task of regulating engineering and technical education in India until the formation of the All India Council of Technical Education in 1987.
It now administers an engineering course, which was initiated way back in 1928.
This course, leading to the award of a degree, is aimed at the professional enrichment of serving technical personnel, who can undertake this programme while continuing in their employment.
I applaud this Institution for all its achievements and urge them to keep up the good work.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The potential of engineering and technology to contribute to economic upliftment and sustainable development has engaged the attention of many today.
At 5.0 per cent in 2012-13, it was the lowest in the last ten years.
Our immediate challenge is to reverse the deceleration and nurse our growth path back to the eight per cent plus levels often clocked by us in the past.
Positive factors such as continuing rise in per capita incomes, expanding middle-class consumers, and a young and energetic workforce gives me confidence that as the global economy revives, we will be able to secure a faster growth.
Engineering has played a pivotal role in this change.
Special initiatives have helped to promote key sectors like automotives, electronics, chemicals and petrochemicals, and heavy machinery.
Clusters and growth corridors have made our firms more efficient.
Such centers at Pune, Chennai and Bengaluru have accorded manufacturers based there, global acclaim for high quality products.
The Government has enunciated the National Manufacturing Policy in 2011 to promote the manufacturing sector.
This umbrella mechanism has envisaged National Investment and Manufacturing Zones that will bring together state-of-the-art infrastructure, latest technology, skill development facilities, and rapid connectivity to emerge as industrial hubs.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I strongly believe that there is another milestone to be crossed in the quality and productivity journey.
The starting point has to be the quality of products emanating from our education system.
Engineering is a preferred discipline accounting for one fourth of the total enrolment in higher education.
The annual enrolment in engineering tripled during the course of the Eleventh Plan period.
We have a formidable set-up of engineering and technical institutions in the country.
However, many of them are low in terms of the standard of education imparted.
In the pursuit of expanding engineering education in the country, academic excellence must be given equal priority.
Our educational standards must be geared to international benchmarks.
Every engineering and technical institution in the country must make an all-out effort to help India develop a large pool of proficient scientific and technical manpower.
The Institution of Engineers (India), which has a wide network all over India, must think of establishing an Institute of Excellence in Engineering and Technology to create synergy between industry and academia through high quality engineering education and innovative research.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
On the other hand, deficiency of natural resource also does not close the gates of prosperity.
The development status of a nation is fashioned by its technological prowess.
Japan and Singapore are instances of nations that have developed on the sheer strength of cutting edge technology.
We have to leverage our knowledge infrastructure to develop growth-inducing technology.
We have to make a choice of technologies for development based on socio-economic, environmental and security factors, and on availability of resource and infrastructure.
I call upon the community of scientists and engineers to provide technology foresight.
For rural rejuvenation to occur there has to be promotion of technology that caters to their needs.
In India, two third of our population reside in rural areas.
It is time we give greater emphasis on developing suitable grassroots technologies for empowerment of the rural population.
The Institution of Engineers (India), which is the largest body of professional engineers and technologists in our country, has to play an important role in promoting economic development by ushering in technological advancements.
With these words, I conclude.
I wish you all the very best in your deliberations at this Congress.
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
The Loyola College is a leading education institution of our country which over the years, has established a stellar reputation for itself.
It is also commendable that the Loyola College has made a mark in industrial research through 8 patents and 8 more pending patents.
I am happy the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research has recognised Loyola College as a Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, the highest research honour for an Arts and Science College.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Our universities have the capability to shape the minds of the youth.
These temples of higher learning must act as guides in meeting the contemporary moral challenges and ensure that our civilizational values of love for motherland; performance of duty; compassion for all; tolerance; pluralism; respect for women and elderly; truth and honest in life; discipline and self-restraint in conduct, and responsibility in action are fully entrenched in the young minds.
There is urgent need to arrest the moral decline in our society and find answers for reversing the degradation of values.
Institutions like the Loyola College should take the lead in this regard.
Our strategy of high economic growth is to overcome poverty and ensure development for all.
We have to make economic growth relevant for our people, especially those at the bottom of the socio-economic pyramid.
Distributive justice, as a higher goal of democratic polity, can be achieved only through a sound education system.
To gain from this transition, our youth must be prepared through quality higher education and vocational training.
The higher education infrastructure in our country comprises over 650 degree awarding institutions and over 33,000 colleges.
Despite this, we are short of good quality institutions to meet the increasing demand.
For about eighteen hundred years, from 6th Century BC to the beginning of 13th Century AD, Indian universities like Takshashila, Nalanda, Vikramashila, Valabhi, Somapura and Odantapuri dominated the world education system.
Sadly today, our universities are nowhere in the top global rankings.
We have within us the ability to revive our leadership position in higher education.
There is nothing that we lack.
We have the best of students and teachers.
All that is needed is coordination and focussed efforts.
We must develop our colleges and universities into world class academic institutions.
A culture of excellence should be promoted with determination and consistency.
Our colleges enrol 87 per cent of the higher education students.
Institutions like the Loyola College must continue to set an example to all other such colleges.
Our universities should make increased use of technology solutions like e-education to address problems of accessibility, quality and faculty shortage.
Using e-classroom technology, important lectures can be transmitted to students in different locations.
The National Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology can assist in such collaborative information sharing efforts.
Compared to this, it is 21 per cent in Germany and 34 per cent in the US.
Greater access to higher education, especially in remote areas, is the need of the hour.
To make higher education affordable for meritorious students belonging to socio-economically difficult backgrounds, measures like scholarships, student loans and self-help schemes are necessary.
We must prepare our graduates to compete with the best in the world.
For that, they must be equipped with life skills such as creative thinking, problem-solving, effective communication, managing inter-personal relationships, and stress management.
These skills are important for a healthy development of an individual, and should find due place in our academic curriculum.
Friends, our higher education institutions are short of good faculty.
We must therefore place top priority on filling up vacancies and building capacity in our teachers.
We need inspired teachers who can shape the thoughts of our young minds.
Through words, actions and deeds, such teachers inspire students and elevate them to a higher level of performance and thinking.
They enable their students appreciate a subject from a wider perspective.
They help inculcate good values in their students.
Our educational institutions must recognize and honour such inspired teachers and encourage them to share their knowledge, wisdom and philosophy with larger number of students.
Innovation is the key to future economic progress.
China and the US are at the forefront of innovation in the world with over 5 lakh patent applications each, filed in 2011.
It is admirable that the Loyola College holds 8 patents and 8 applications are pending.
Sadly, India, with only 42,000 patent applications, lags far behind countries like China and the US.
We must put in place a system to attract Indian researchers working abroad to return work on short-term projects in our country.
This decade has been declared as the decade of innovation.
There are grass root innovations that require technological and commercial mentoring for developing them into viable products.
In a Conference of the Vice Chancellors of Central Universities held in Rashtrapati Bhavan early this year, a recommendation was made to set up Innovators Clubs in all the Central Universities and to facilitate interaction between the university communities and grassroots innovators.
I have since opened such clubs in many Central Universities and IITs/NITs.
I urge Loyola College to also consider doing so.
With unlimited demands and limited resources, it is important that private sector also contributes its best to the provision of higher education in India.
The private sector has played a key role in higher education in other countries across the world.
Many top universities including Harvard, Yale and Stanford are the result of efforts of the private sector.
There is no reason why Indian private sector cannot achieve similar results.
However, education must be taken up for public service and not private profit.
Let me conclude quoting Mahamana Pt.
Be just and fear none.
Fear only to do that which is ill and ignoble.
Stand up for right.
Love to serve your fellow-men.
Love the motherland.
Promote public weal.
Do good wherever you get a chance for it.
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
These Awards have been instituted to recognize outstanding contributors from the industrial sector towards energy conservation.
I am delighted to witness the colourful and inspirational paintings drawn by the children in the painting competition organized as part of the event.
It is a good occasion to involve school children in promoting the cause of energy conservation.
Children have to be actively engaged in promoting conservation of resources to ensure a better tomorrow.
I congratulate all the award winning and participating children.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Any supply constraint can adversely impact the economy of a country, more so of a developing country.
India has embarked on a high growth strategy to achieve all-round development.
Energy Intensity, which is a measure of energy efficiency of an economy, indicates that India uses more energy to produce one unit of GDP, than nations like UK, Germany, Japan and US.
The high growth envisaged by us require greater amount of energy while the domestic sources of energy is increasingly subjected to more number of competing uses.
Energy security has indeed become synonymous with national security.
Accelerated industrialization, growing urbanization and an emerging consumer society has led to a significant increase in energy demand.
Meeting the energy needs of the population in a scenario of increasing supply limitations has posed a formidable challenge for sustainable economic growth.
As an effective strategy to counter this growing difficulty, the growth in energy demand vis-à-vis the growth of GDP has to be contained through improved energy efficiency.
Resource-use efficiency and conservation are critical for the agenda of inclusive growth and development.
These elements deserve top priority in the way we utilize our scarce natural resources.
Energy conservation also implies the substitution of costly imported energy by cheap energy.
This will help in reducing our foreign exchange outgo.
Conservation of energy is a critical development imperative that has multiple positive spinoffs.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The Twelfth Five Year Plan recognizes the importance of evolving a low carbon strategy for inclusive and sustainable growth.
A national target to increase energy use efficiency has been set.
It will bring a twenty to twenty five percent reduction in the energy intensity of our GDP by 2020.
A range of initiatives has already been identified as part of the climate strategy of India.
It is important to ensure that the strategies are translated on the ground through comprehensive programmes.
More such initiatives are necessary to include energy efficiency as a core performance parameter for our industry.
Such efforts will go a long way in restricting the spiraling demand for energy by some of the most energy-intensive sectors of our economy.
This initiative would require the development of appliances that are more efficient and affordable.
It would also spur greater innovation in the manufacturing sector in India.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Innovation and technology provides the competitive edge that our industrial sector so desperately requires.
There is need for domain knowledge, for developing capabilities and strengthening systems through innovation.
There is need to ensure an environment conducive to innovation.
It will help to make available a pipeline of technologies that addresses both climate change and energy efficient development needs at costs that users are able to pay.
The US has turned itself from being a huge net energy importer to being self-sufficient through the discovery of shale gas.
This has been possible because of a crucial technological breakthrough in efficient recovery of shale gas.
Likewise, the parameters for developing future technologies in India have to be defined.
Our scientists and technologists have to engage themselves in the cause of making our country self-sufficient in energy.
Policy making also has to be proactive to identify problems, highlight trends, develop scenarios, and recommend policy options, so as to avert any crisis.
Efficient use of resources has to begin from our homes.
The educational systems have to be utilized extensively for integrating the concept of sustainability into the social systems.
I extend my best wishes to the school children who have actively participated in the National Energy Painting Competition.
I once again congratulate all the National Energy Conservation Award winners and wish all those concerned with the conduct of this event very good luck.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
It is also a forum to reiterate our commitment to strengthen the public sector.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The Constitution of India has guided our approach to public sector.
The 1956 policy was unambiguous in assigning a leadership position to the public sector.
In an economy that had to be built up virtually from scratch, the public sector became the driving force to bring India into the group of manufacturing nations.
An industrial sector that could produce only the simplest of goods was transformed into a manufacturing and infrastructure heavyweight with the capacity to create complex and diversified range of products.
The rapid industrial scale-up through the public sector boosted the confidence of Indians.
PSEs emerged as major employers, providing livelihood to millions of people.
They promoted balanced regional development and contributed to welfare of the communities and societies where they operated.
Over the years, several PSEs have emerged as global companies, actively participating in innovative and strategic operations across all geographies.
The contribution of our public sector to economic development is indeed seminal.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The public sector started as the chosen instrument to usher in economic development.
Economic advancement led to an increasing presence of the private corporate sector, with agile entities running on advanced techno-managerial practices.
The government became comfortable in withdrawing from sectors that could be served well by the private sector.
Our economy today is the third largest in the world on purchasing power parity basis.
It has the space and the need for co-existence of both the public and the private sectors.
Though the economic reforms of 1991 sought to restructure PSEs and re-orient their role, the fundamental philosophy of their creation - as instruments for fostering growth and development of the nation - has not wavered.
The country needs a strong public sector to complement the efforts of the private industry.
It underlines the need to bring in measures to strengthen the PSEs.
It calls for increased autonomy to enable PSEs to meet the demands of the market in a responsive manner.
Managerial and commercial autonomy has been devolved on the profit-making central sector PSEs through the scheme of Maharatnas, Navratnas and Miniratnas.
There are seven Maharatnas, fourteen Navratnas and seventy Miniratnas today.
These measures, by providing the operational flexibility to respond quickly to market, have led to an improvement in their performance.
However, the pressures of liberalization and globalization imply that we cannot rest on our laurels.
Much more needs to be done to provide a level playing field between the public and private sectors in terms of flexibility of operation and quicker decision-making.
A measure that can help in this process is the listing of PSEs on stock exchanges.
Listing will allow millions of small and large shareholders to participate in their ownership, the collective action of which could stimulate the PSEs to better their performance.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The experience of government-owned companies varies from country to country.
While each government has attempted to leverage the resources of their PSEs, the models differ.
The public sector model in different nations is a study in contrast.
But by studying such models, we can evolve a suitable format that converge the needs of our economy and society.
To my mind, the foremost challenge of Indian PSEs today is to increase their competitiveness to deal with market forces.
Management has to be of the highest professional level, enabling the attainment of global benchmarks in productivity and efficiency and meeting the multiple objectives expected of contemporary global enterprise.
Many of our PSEs have emerged as exemplars in productivity and quality.
Their business practices have to be studied and appropriately disseminated to other similar and less successful PSEs.
Management of human resources, including dealing with the existing skill gap as well as forecasting and preparing for skills required in the future, have to be accorded priority.
Though central sector PSEs are already discharging their duties in the arena of Corporate Social Responsibility, they would need to set an example for their private sector counterparts in view of the provisions laid down in the Companies Act, 2013.
Developing new products and processes, entering new markets, and addressing new consumers have to be an ongoing business strategy.
PSEs have to take a leading role in espousing such business behaviour.
Many PSEs have active programmes of overseas engagement.
They have to strategize to seize the commanding heights of the global economy.
Strategies like smooth and facilitative systems for vendor payment, greater use of information technology, and greater engagement of smaller firms have to be adopted to keep industrial operations stable and enable growth of all firms in the value chain.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
They have served as progenitors of Indian industry and stabilizers of Indian economy.
As model employers and as leaders of the industrial community, PSEs have contributed in many ways.
I am confident that it will grow in strength and meet the heightened expectations of the nation.
I compliment the Department Public Enterprises and the Confederation of Indian Industry for undertaking this initiative.
I wish you all a successful conduct of this Conference.
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
President Jacob Zuma,
Distinguished Leaders of the African National Congress,
Eminent Heads of State and Governments and
Representatives of the world community gathered here today,
We pray for his eternal peace.
We, in India, have long admired him - and all that he stood for - and we will always cherish his friendship and love for our people.
He epitomised an uncommon humaneness that inspired all of mankind.
A towering personality of great compassion and wisdom, he guided his nation, bruised by decades of apartheid and violence, to embrace his simple message of tolerance and harmonious co-existence.
In the face of the severest persecution, punishment and relentless oppression, Nelson Mandela continued his non-violent struggle with dignity and pride, refusing to be intimidated.
His stoic determination, patience and magnanimity reminded us, in India, of the revolutionary methods of Mahatma Gandhi.
Madiba received an unprecedented public welcome and was felicitated in Delhi and Calcutta.
Gandhiji had staked his career as a budding lawyer in South Africa to resist segregation and inequality - before he embarked for India and took up, in India, the same cause.
It is no wonder then that we, in India, attach great sentiment to our unique friendship with the people of this great country South Africa.
Jai Hind!
Nomoskar!
My son, Abhijit who is now a Member of the Lok Sabha, started his political career as Member of this Assembly.
I first entered the hallowed corridors of Parliament in 1969 on being elected to the Rajya Sabha by members of the West Bengal Legislative Assembly.
There after on three more occasions I was elected by members of West Bengal Assembly to Rajya Sabha in 1975, 1993 and 1999.
I greet them and wish them the very best of health.
I compliment the West Bengal Legislative Assembly for felicitating on this occasion senior Members of this House who are the torch-bearers of our Parliamentary traditions.
Through this august house, they have given expression to the voice and spirit of the people of Bengal.
Three of its members Khawja Nazimuddin, Hussain Shaheed Suhrawardy and Mohammad Ali of Bogra went on to become Prime Ministers of Pakistan.
Similarly, Shri Jyoti Basu who served 22 months as Deputy Chief Minister and 23 years as Chief Minister is the longest serving Chief Minister in the country.
(Incidentally, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru was Prime Minister for 17 years and Shri Karunanidhi, who has been a member of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly/Council for 50 years was Chief Minister for 19 years)
Its mute walls are witness to innumerable historic events.
The Platinum Jubilee celebrations mark 75 years since the first election to the Bengal Legislative Assembly in January 1937, under the Government of India Act, 1935.
The first session of the Assembly met in the Council Chamber of the Council House on April 7, 1937 at 2.30 P.M.
Kolkota has been the nursery of legislative practice and representative democracy in our country.
The Charter of 1726 vested, for the first time, the Governors and the Councils of the three Presidencies with legislative power.
This Act is also said to have started the process of territorial integration and administrative centralization in India.
It accorded supremacy to the Presidency of Bengal and the Governor of Bengal was appointed as the Governor-General.
A Council consisting of four members was constituted to assist the Governor-General.
The Governor-General of Bengal was, thereafter, designated as the Governor General of India and empowered to administer the whole of British India.
This Act set up one legislative council for all the British territories in India and introduced an element of institutional specialization by differentiating the law-making meetings of the Council from its executive meetings.
Legislative functions of the state was thus for the first time separated from its executive functions.
It was perhaps for the first time that Indian opinion was being expressed on the subject of legislative reforms.
Bills passed through the usual three stages and were referred to Select Committees.
Legislative business was conducted in public instead of in secret and reports of proceedings were officially published.
Standing orders were adopted to conduct and regulate proceedings.
The new Council conceived its duties not to be confined only to legislation but also began to assume the character of a miniature representative assembly, assembled for the purpose of enquiry into and redress of grievances.
Shri Prasanna Kumar Tagore was appointed to the post of Clerk of the Council and he went on to provide the Council with a parliamentary form of procedure and encouraged it to assert its independence as a separate organ of government.
Public were allowed to witness the proceedings of the Council and press reporting was permitted in 1856.
Despite the progressive establishment of legislative practices and procedures, there was, however, no Indian participation in the Council.
Between 1862 and 1892, forty-five Indians were nominated to the Legislative Council.
Most of them were ruling princes or chiefs and rich zamindar families.
During the Viceroyalty of Lord Rippon, Durga Charan Law, a merchant, Raja Shiva Prasad, an Inspector of Schools and Syed Ameer Ali, a Presidency Magistrate were nominated.
Editor of the Hindoo Patriot, Kristodas Pal recommended by the British Indian Association and after his death Peare Mohan Mukherjee were also nominated to the Council by Lord Rippon.
They remained docile and presented little opposition to the Government.
There remained at the same time strong opposition to Indian involvement in the Councils on the part of many Englishmen.
Surendranath Banerjee and Ananda Mohan Bose were its leading organizers.
Bose depicted this conference as the first stage towards the formation of a National Indian Parliament.
The Conference demanded introduction of representative assemblies for the advancement of the people of India.
The National Conference was in many ways the precursor of the Indian National Congress.
At its very first session, the Congress passed a resolution asking for constitutional reforms and for the admission of a considerable proportion of elected members to the Legislative Councils and the right to discuss the budget.
Delivering his Presidential Address at the first session in Kolkata, W.C. Banerjee described the Congress as the National Assembly of India.
The Congress considered the reform of the Councils at the root of all other reforms.
The first budget was presented on 18 February, 1860.
While discussion on the budget as such was not allowed, this was sometimes sought to be made possible by linking the budget with some proposal for taxation.
During 1861-62, there were 16 occasions when budget was discussed in that manner.
The Council had no right to vote on the Budget.
Members of the Council however still had no powers to submit or propose any resolution or to divide the Council in respect of any financial discussion.
The first question was asked on 16 February 1893.
The questioner was the Maharaja of Bhinga and the question concerned hardships caused by the system of collecting supplies of provision for government officers on tour.
Congress veteran Sir Pherozeshah Mehta, the first elected Indian Member was frank, bold and vigorous in his criticism of government policies.
In order to stem the growth of the nationalist movement in India, Lord Lytton decided to censor the vernacular press.
Pherozeshah Mehta vehemently opposed the move.
He believed that the press should be as free as possible, and that it was the fundamental duty of the government to educate the masses.
There remained an official majority in the Councils.
The Government could always pass Bills disregarding opposition by Indian members.
The Indian Councils Act of 1909 empowered the Governor General to nominate one Indian member to the Executive Council leading to the appointment of Shri Satyendra Prasanno Sinha as the first Indian member.
Elected members were to be returned by constituencies, such as municipalities, district and local boards, universities, chambers of commerce and trade associations and groups of persons such as land-holders or tea planters.
The constituencies were small, the largest of them comprising only 650 persons.
Out of 27 elected members in the Central Council, only 9 were supposed to represent the people of India as a whole.
It is this Act which regrettably introduced for the first time the principle of communal representation in India and created separate electorates.
This was the beginning of non-official resolutions.
The first resolution under the rules was moved on 25 February 1910 by Gopal Krishna Gokhale recommending prohibition of indentured labour for Natal in South Africa.
On the Rowlatt Bill, Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya spoke for two and a half hours.
Similarly, on Indemnity Bill he spoke for four hours continuously and in all, he spent six and a half hours speaking on the Bill.
It was very rare that non-official members could have their way.
Still, they made their presence felt by moving amendments, resolutions and asking questions.
The Budget was considered in two stages.
The presentation of a preliminary budget called the financial statement was followed by a general discussion.
Some items of expenditure such as that of the Army were however treated as non votable.
Though non-official members were in no position to defeat government measures in the Council, they took question procedure very seriously.
While in 1911 only 151 questions were put and answered, the number rose to 397 by the year 1919.
These were met with bitter and prolonged opposition both inside and outside the Legislature.
Debate went on for eight hours extending over two days in which as many as 20 non official members took part.
The Indian members opposed the Bill not only at the introduction stage but at every stage.
On all occasions, Indian members voted solidly together.
Some members such as Malaviya and Sukul resigned their membership of the Council in protest.
This system established a dual form of government in each province.
The upper house was the Council of States consisting of 34 elected and 26 nominated members and tenure of five years.
The 1919 Act also provided for classification of subjects of administration as Central and Provincial and for the devolution of authority in respect of provincial subjects to local governments; and for the allocation of revenues and other moneys to those governments.
The same Act laid the foundations of modern provincial legislatures in India and sparked off a process of decentralization.
A Legislative Council comprising 12 Members, for undivided province of Bengal was established on 18th January, 1862.
Out of these 12 nominated Members, 4 were Indians, namely, Baboo Rama Persaud Roy, the son of Raja Rammohan Roy; Moulvy Abdool Luteef Khan Bahadoor; Rajah Pertaub Chand Singh and Babu Prosonno Coomar Tagore.
The first meeting of the Council was held on 1st February, 1862 under the Presidentship of Sir John Peter Grant, Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal at his residence at Belvedere, Kolkata.
Under the Government of India Act 1919, the number of members of the Bengal Legislative Council was increased to 125 of which at least 70% were elected.
The venue of sitting of the Council was shifted to the Town Hall, Kolkata where it remained till 1931.
Nawab Sir Samuel Huda was the first non-official presiding officer.
The Assembly comprised of 250 Members while the total number of Council Members was not less than 63 and not more than 65.
Sir Azizul Haque was elected as Speaker of Bengal Legislative Assembly, while Shri Satyendra Chandra Mitra was elected President of the Council on 9th April, 1937.
They believed that work within the legislatures could be an equally effective instrument for furthering the nationalist cause.
It could highlight the deficiencies of alien rule and at the same time, demonstrate to the British our ability to master the nuances of the parliamentary system.
He excelled himself in the question hour and became a master of the art of interpellation.
When the time came for elections to the Madras Legislative Council, Gandhiji declared that it was enough if one Satyamurti was sent to the Legislatures.
Shri Satyamurti was member of the Central Legislative Assembly from 1935 to 1939 where his success as a legislator led Gandhiji to remark that if there had been ten Satyamurtis in our legislatures, the British would have quit long ago.
However, many Congress politicians respected Sir Sapru as an eminent jurist.
His ties with the British made him valuable as a mediator and Sir Sapru mediated between Gandhi and the Viceroy Lord Irwin, helping to forge the Gandhi-Irwin Pact.
Sir Sapru was chosen as the representative of Indian Liberals at the Round Table Conferences of 1931-1933.
At the same time, Pandit Motilal Nehru as leader of the Swarajya Party in Central Council laid the basic foundation of constitutional government in India.
Both Motilal and Chittaranjan were able to keep the Muslims with the Swarajya Party to project a united India.
It is to underline the fact that being a representative of the people of West Bengal is a privilege and a great honour.
As the cradle of representative government in our country, the West Bengal Legislative Assembly has a larger responsibility than any other body in our country for upholding and promoting the best of parliamentary norms.
This Assembly has a duty and responsibility to set an example to the rest of the country.
The job of a legislator is a 24x7 responsibility.
Legislators must at all times be sensitive and responsive to the problems and concerns of the people.
They must give voice to the grievances of the public by raising them on the floor of the Legislature and act as the link between the people and the Government.
Parliamentary practices, procedures and conventions are meant to provide for orderly and expeditious transaction of business of the House.
Dissent should be expressed with decency and within the contours and parameters of parliamentary devices.
However, the minority has to accept the decisions of the majority while the majority has to respect the views of the minority.
No expenditure can be incurred by the Executive without approval of Legislature.
No tax can be levied except by a law passed by the Legislature.
No money can be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of the State without the approval of the Legislature.
To illustrate, the first Lok Sabha from 1952-57 had 677 sittings in which 319 bills were passed.
In comparison, the fourteenth Lok Sabha from 2004-2009 had only 332 sittings and passed just 247 bills.
Similarly, the first West Bengal Legislative Assembly from 1952-57 sat for 326 days.
In comparison, the fourteenth Legislative Assembly from 2006-11 sat for only 231 days.
The number of sittings of the current fifteenth Legislative Assembly in 2011 was 33 days and 2012 was 41 days.
The Presiding Officers Conferences have time and again reiterated the need for holding a minimum of 100 days of sittings every year.
With the heightened complexity of administration, legislation must be preceded by adequate discussion and scrutiny, if not, it will fail to deliver the desired results or meet its objectives.
Ordinances should be normally promulgated only in the event of immediate need.
Some States, however appear to be pushing through certain controversial legislations through ordinances.
Such Ordinances do not have the approval of the House and are not debated or discussed properly by the legislators.
Such Ordinances should normally die a natural death if the Assembly fails to ratify them.
We should also examine whether our Committees can consider post-approval scrutiny of budgetary allocations made to various Ministries.
As members of different political Parties, individual Legislators would be guided by the policies of their respective Parties.
Competitive politics should not however result in slowing down the progress of the State or enhancing the suffering of its people.
Most issues of development and public welfare transcend political barriers.
It should not be difficult to forge consensus on such issues.
Let us decide while the dispute is fresh, lest the small disputes grow big and continue for the long time.
We have come together for a council meeting and let us speak in one voice and decide our verdict.
But there is no room for complacency.
You must at all times be attentive to the rising expectations of the people.
It must be always kept in mind that people are our masters and each one of us is here because we solicited their votes and received their endorsement
Members of this Assembly must meet the challenges which confront the people of West Bengal head on, with unity, determination and long term vision.
I am confident the West Bengal Legislative Assembly will continue to maintain its high traditions and lead the state on the path of prosperity and progress.
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
Today, we honor achievers among differently-abled individuals who have overcome enormous odds with their remarkable courage and indomitable spirit.
Awards have also been given to the Institutions which have made outstanding contribution to the empowerment of Persons with Disabilities.
Their work is noble and exemplary as it seeks the inclusion of differently abled persons into the mainstream of society.
However, it is seen that when Persons with Disabilities are empowered to participate fully in societal life on an equal basis with others, the nation and society as a whole are benefitted.
Therefore, the barriers faced by Persons with Disabilities which are detrimental to societal growth need to be removed.
With a positive and humane attitude, the society, NGOs and individuals should extend support and guidance to the differently-abled and their families to ensure their socio-psychological and emotional integration into the mainstream of society.
Education and awareness can correct negative perceptions.
Reasonable opportunities should be provided to Persons with Disabilities in order to achieve progress and development for all.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
We are committed to the full empowerment of Persons with Disabilities.
Thus, India signed and ratified the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
We need to move forward on this agenda to provide Persons with Disabilities with an environment conducive for their full development and ensure their equal participation in the development of our nation.
Recently, in September, 2013, the United Nations General Assembly convened a high-level meeting of nations to highlight the close linkage between development and disability.
Since, it was felt that the development of a nation is not possible if the needs and capacities of persons with disabilities are not recognized, all nations resolved to seriously consider disability concerns in all their developmental activities.
This is a remarkable step taken internationally for improving the quality of lives of Persons with Disabilities.
India has fully endorsed this stand.
The Government is at an advanced stage of bringing in a new and comprehensive law in consonance with the provisions of the UN Convention.
I understand that this is a holistic piece of legislation which would entail major responsibilities not merely on the Union Government, but also on State Governments, local bodies, and even private service providers.
Greater convergence in the activities of the various Union and State Ministries and Departments such as those of Social Justice & Empowerment, Women and Child Development, Human Resource Development, Health and Family Welfare and Labour & Employment is required for achieving better results.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The mainstreaming of the concerns of the differently-abled is necessary to ensure their participation and involvement in the many spheres and activities of the society.
Besides a strong policy framework, we must have an efficient and effective delivery mechanism in place to ensure that desired benefits can reach Persons with Disabilities.
The Central and State Governments must effectively partner with the private sector and civil society in their endeavour to create an inclusive society.
This is necessary in order to bring them into the mainstream of society and improve the quality of their lives.
Children with disabilities should get adequate opportunities to pursue their education which can enable them to get gainful employment in future for leading a life of dignity and respect.
It should be ensured that children with special needs get access to education at par with others.
We have to provide the right kind of teaching-learning environment, material in accessible format and barrier-free educational institutions.
It is imperative to have websites in accessible format for reaching information to the differently abled.
Ensuring the provision of accessible information and disabled friendly technology will enhance the opportunities for progress of persons with disabilities.
Special training of teachers in adequate numbers is essential so that they can understand the needs of children with disabilities and thereby teach and guide them effectively.
Efforts should be made to provide innovative user friendly aids, assistive devices as also computer software and accessories to all Persons with Disabilities at a reasonable and affordable cost, so that they have equal opportunities for enhancement and actualization of their inherent potential.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The Government as well as public and private sectors should work hand in hand to improve the skill-levels of Persons with Disabilities, with a view to enhance their employability.
The private sector is also a large employer and can play a commendable role in providing opportunities to differently abled persons to prove their capabilities.
The private sector should come forward to meet their social responsibility obligations and take pro-active steps to provide placements for Persons with Disabilities in their establishments and industries.
Greater awareness and a pro-active approach are required in this regard.
ASHA, Anganwadi workers and other field level workers should be specially sensitized and trained to identify children with disabilities to facilitate an early intervention.
I hope they will inspire many others to come forward to work with dedication and commitment to make our society more disabled-friendly and inclusive.
Let us all, on this occasion, pledge to work towards the empowerment and inclusion of all in our society.
At the outset, let me congratulate the people and Government of Nagaland on their completion of 50 years as a state.
I also compliment them on having organized this Hornbill Festival 2013 which brings together all Naga tribes in a collaborative effort to preserve, protect and provide new impetus to their rich traditions of music, dance, food and culture.
I am happy to release on this joyous occasion a commemorative Stamp of Nagaland and a coffee table book.
This is evidence of both my fondness for this state and its wonderful people as well as the importance I attach to the progress and development of this state.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
He said leaders must exercise a human and healing touch in their relations with the people so that they are not deprived of their innocent joys, songs and dances, and feasts and festivals.
I am delighted to note his message being implemented through this Festival and would urge the leadership to continue to heed this advice.
I would like to use this occasion to call upon the people of the rest of India to discover Nagaland, visit this state, contribute to the local economy and strengthen the bonds that tie different parts of our country and people together.
Its achievements in human development and industrial growth are praiseworthy.
Yet, there remains much to be done.
In a modern globalised world, the expectations of our people are high.
There is need for infrastructure and connectivity.
Youth should have jobs.
There should be visible improvement in the quality of life.
Development should be inclusive, equitable and sustainable.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Nations and economies have never been as closely linked with each other as they are today.
Unprecedented opportunities exist for the people of this state and our country in these changing times.
Raising Nagaland to the ranks of leading states in the country is a goal which can be achieved if there is vision, leadership and hard work.
The Central and state governments must join hands in a collective endeavour supported by all the people of the state and dedicate themselves to the attainment of this goal.
I urge all concerned to work towards establishing and maintaining a peaceful environment in the state so that the dreams of the youth can be realized in the shortest possible time.
Only Mizoram remains and I look forward to an early occasion to visit the state soon.
My frequent visits to this region reflect its strategic importance and the role it can play in the building of a strong and powerful India.
This region can become a magnet for major investments from the rest of the country as well as abroad.
It can turn itself into a major centre for trade and business.
India's future and economic interests are best served by closer integration with rest of Asia.
The Centre and State Governments should work together to rapidly build connectivity and infrastructure linkages with the rest of India as well as our neighbours.
A billion people are marching forward led by the ideas, enterprise and energy of its predominantly young population.
I am confident that India will soon emerge as a strong and powerful nation, our economy will continue to witness rapid growth and people will enjoy a high quality of life as well as freedom, justice and equality.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Nagaland must take its due place in our great country.
I call upon the people of Nagaland to reach out to the other states.
It is heartening to note many youth from this region being engaged in hospitality and information technology sectors and working in different parts of the country.
I call upon the youth of Nagaland to join hands with the young in the rest of our country and together forge the future of our nation.
Let a new dawn emerge.
Let us together move forward with faith in our common destiny.
The Government of India is determined and duty bound to ensure that every Naga lives with dignity having equal rights and equal opportunities.
Let it set an example to the rest of India and show how the entire region can be transformed into an area of peace, stability and prosperity.
I once again compliment all of you on the fiftieth anniversary of Nagaland Statehood and wish you happy Hornbill Festival.
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
The physical beauty bestowed by nature is only matched by the splendor of the songs, dances and crafts of the people.
Arunachal is a historical land.
Its name finds mention in the literature of Kalika Purana and Mahabharata.
This land is marked by important centres of pilgrimage like Tawang Monastery and Parasuramkund.
Arunachal Pradesh is on the threshold of a major transformation.
Economic sectors, especially hydro-electric power and tourism, have immense potential to drive the development of this state.
Education has to be a facilitator to this change.
It has created necessary infrastructural and intellectual resources for quality higher education.
The courses and extension programmes of the University have catered to the socio-cultural, economic, ethnic and geographical requirement of the region.
Through its affiliated colleges and post-graduate departments, the University has made a visible impact in teaching-learning innovations and quality research.
I compliment the Vice-Chancellor and the entire academic and administrative team of this University for these achievements.
Dear Students:
Convocation is an important event in the academic calendar of any university.
It gives a sense of identity to the graduating students.
It is a day to acknowledge your success achieved through perseverance and dedication.
It is also a momentous day for your family and friends who have stood with you through thick and thin.
Convocation day reaffirms the solemn duty of each generation to transmit the best of its knowledge, culture and wisdom, gathered in the hallowed precinct of the university, onto the next generation.
It reminds of the responsibility that awaits you as graduates and scholars.
The society, which has invested in your education, can legitimately expect a dividend from you.
You can pay this dividend by helping your less fortunate brethren.
You can shape the destiny of our nation by your drive, initiative and ingenuity.
A good education breeds tolerance for divergent views.
Our country has done well in terms of economic development.
Yet, we cannot claim to have evolved into a truly developed society.
Development is not only about factories, dams and roads.
Development, to my mind, is about people, their values and their devotion to spiritual and cultural heritage of our nation.
At a time when we, as a nation, have to make an extra effort to surmount the contemporary moral challenges, it is holistic education that must play a definitive role in shaping our values.
Our educational institutions have a pivotal role to inculcate in our youth the core civilizational values of love for motherland; performance of duty; compassion for all; tolerance for pluralism; respect for women; honesty in life; self-restraint in conduct, responsibility in action and discipline.
Friends:
Today, our universities lag behind the best universities in the world.
According to an international survey, an Indian university or an institution is missing from the top two hundred ranks.
We cannot afford to continue with an education system which is even a notch below the global standards.
India is poised to become a world power.
Our leadership in fields such as science and technology is incumbent on the level of competence in our scientists, academics, engineers and doctors.
Top quality teachers must be drafted.
Teaching as a profession must be made attractive for bright students.
Innovative teaching methodologies must be adopted by increasing the use of technology.
A culture of excellence must be promoted.
Every university must identify one or two departments that define its core competency and nurture them into centres of excellence.
Friends:
It gives rise to new thinking.
It results in new and perhaps better direction to solve numerous problems faced by the society.
The quality of research in Indian universities leaves much to be desired.
Research facilities must be upgraded to international standards to attract the brightest minds.
The research temper of the students must be developed.
The spirit of innovation must be ignited in the young minds.
Universities must become an important platform for any researcher to pursue their curiosity and creativity.
There is scope for conducting innovative research in North East India, a region rich in natural resources and biodiversity.
Over-exploitation of natural resources causes environmental degradation and leads to long run unsustainability.
The onus is on you to work out alternative growth models, which are sustainable.
You must carry out inter-disciplinary research on natural resource management.
You must conduct research on challenges to hill economy, conflict between traditional and modern institutions, border trade opportunities and integration of the North East economy with the national and global economies.
It is gratifying to note that a few departments of Rajiv Gandhi University have received grants for setting up research facilities.
I expect the university to conduct relevant research to the benefit of this region and the country.
Dear Students:
After completing university education, you have a higher calling to tend to - the task of nation building which, without each one of you collaborating, will remain under-performed.
Go out with the knowledge that you have the tools necessary to build our nation and take it to the future.
Remember that once you step out of your alma mater, life will provide you ample opportunity to learn.
Gain knowledge from wherever you get.
Be humble.
Be free from fear.
Be generous.
In whatever field you are working, always try to enhance the prestige of your university and country.
If you have skill power and will power, you can make it happen.
I wish you all success in life.
I also wish the management and faculty of this University the very best.
I am glad to have this opportunity to share some of my perceptions about governance and public service on this occasion.
The need for an autonomous body to create merit-based civil services was felt even long before the Independence.
The first Public Service Commission was set up in 1926 under the chairmanship of Sir Ross Barker.
This Commission had limited advisory function.
Subsequently, Federal Public Service Commission was set-up under the Government of India Act, 1935.
It contained provision for formation of Public Service Commissions at the provincial levels.
After India attained Independence, the Union Public Service Commission was set-up under Article 315 of the Constitution of India.
The Constituent Assembly played a dominant and visionary role in granting Constitutional status to UPSC, as it realised the importance of having an autonomous body to provide for public administration based on professionally managed cadres of Civil Services.
The UPSC is the nursery of administrative ethics.
It is the alma mater for selection of men and women of excellence, as officers in the service of the nation.
Its role in human resource management of the Government is crucial as it has to recommend the best candidates from amongst the millions of aspirants.
Over the years, UPSC has helped create a civil service which is diverse and representative, reflecting the pluralistic ethos of our country.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It also functions as an instrument of economic growth and social change.
It assists the government in formulating and implementing policies for national development.
The tasks and challenges of nation building require close interaction and cooperation between the civil servants and the people.
It underlines the need for civil services to be foremost in their commitment towards the people.
Today, India stands at the threshold of global leadership in terms of political and economic evolution.
The expectations of the nation have grown immensely as a result of economic success.
Integration with the global trends and opening up of the economy has resulted in diversified challenges for the civil services.
People want transparent and professional administration to take care of their needs efficiently.
They want immediate disposal of their grievances.
They expect the benefits of welfare measures to seamlessly reach the poorest of the poor.
This calls for improving service delivery by adopting good governance practices.
Governance is crucial for economic development, equity and social participation of various sections of society.
An impartial and apolitical bureaucracy strengthens governance and contributes towards economic development and social transformation.
However, the concept has been in vogue since ancient times.
Absence of good governance has been identified as the root cause of many of the deficiencies in society.
It robs the citizenry of their social and economic rights.
Good governance signifies basic parameters such as rule of law, participatory decision-making structure, transparency, accountability, responsiveness, equity and inclusiveness.
This necessitates a reorientation in the outlook of the civil services.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Governance and administrative reforms have been an evolving process needing a continuous dialogue with the final recipients of services.
The Administrative Reforms Commission has provided a blueprint for improved governance.
Transparency refers to the availability of information to the general public and clarity about the functioning of governmental institutions.
Transparency enhances predictability as it helps government organizations to function more objectively.
It also enables and encourages the common man to effectively participate in the governance process.
The Right to Information Act has made the administrative machinery more responsive and efficient in meeting the needs of the masses.
There has been a paradigm shift in the developmental approach.
Citizens have been provided security for food, education and job by empowering them through entitlements backed by legal guarantees.
Implementing these novel initiatives call for robust delivery mechanisms.
The Direct Benefits Transfer Scheme, launched in January 2013, leverages the Aadhaar system to usher in greater transparency and improve targeting, eliminate wastage and enhance efficiency.
The Right of Citizens for Time Bound Delivery of Goods and Services and Redressal of their Grievances Bill, 2011 envisages the citizens to receive time-bound services.
This would help create a more responsive administration to improve service delivery.
Automation of government services has facilitated information dissemination.
It has been successful in areas like land records management, law and order administration, pension disbursement and public information systems, especially relating to health and railways.
The greater usage of internet has helped to integrate all areas of our country into the mainstream.
Corruption is one of the biggest factors that hinder efficient performance of the economy.
There is need to eliminate interface in the delivery of services.
It is also necessary to adopt non-discretionary approach towards decision-making and initiate two-way communication with the users.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I am not saying that decisions have to be taken in a haste.
But to prolong or avoid taking decisions is not aceptable.
We have to develop our public administration into a dynamic and result oriented bureaucracy.
I am happy at the introduction of objective targets for government departments and officers to monitor and improve performance.
The need for judicial reforms and initiation of measures like greater use of information technology to clear pending court cases is essential.
Simplification of laws is also needed for better governance.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I am glad that UPSC has introduced reforms in the process of recruiting civil servants, as a measure to create more responsive and modern civil services.
These reforms will also provide a level playing field to all the aspirants coming from diverse backgrounds.
The focus is now on evaluating the aptitude of the candidates for dealing with newer challenges on the basis of their decision-making capacity on ethical and moral dimensions.
I take this opportunity to extend my heartfelt wishes to this great Institution and those who have served it.
However, there is always scope for systematic and continuous improvement in service delivery to meet the heightened needs and expectations of the people.
The need to inculcate the spirit of public service in the civil services would be the most essential ingredient for better governance and growth of the nation.
I wish you all the very best.
I am delighted to be here today to address this august House.
Nested in the foothills of the Himalayas, the State of Arunachal Pradesh has always occupied a unique space in the Indian imagination.
The natural beauty of the state along with it being home to a diversity of cultures, religions and peoples has rendered it a special character within the Indian Union.
Arunachal is the largest state area-wise in the north-east region with ever green forests covering 82% of the State.
The state is inhabited by 26 major tribes and 110 sub-tribes, who speak different dialects.
At the same time the state has the lowest density in the country of 17 persons per sq.
It finds mention in the Puranas and the Mahabharata.
It is believed that here Sage Parashuram washed away his sins, Sage Vyasa meditated, King Bhishmaka founded his kingdom and Lord Krishna married his consort Rukmini.
Arunachal is also home to the 400 year old Tawang Monastry and the birth place of the sixth Dalai Lama, Tsangyang Gyatso.
The richness of flora and fauna that occur in this state presents a panorama of biological diversity.
The emphasis laid by successive Governments on faster and inclusive development under the guidance of this Legislature over the last 38 years has resulted in significant improvement in the quality of life.
The State which started from almost zero literacy rate at the time of independence is soon going to touch the national average.
It is a matter of joy that within couple of months the people of this State will get their first ever train in the State capital.
I congratulate and compliment all of you on the many achievements of Arunachal Pradesh in recent times.
Arunachal Pradesh has always recorded a relatively high percentage of voter turn-out in every election.
This shows the interest and political consciousness of the people of the State.
This is very encouraging and further promotes the growth of representative democracy.
Traditions of consultative decision-making have been prevalent in our country since the ancient times.
It is said that during the Vedic age, Assemblies of people conducted the business of administration by deliberating on policies, formulating legislation and dispensing justice.
The popular assembly was a regular institution in the early years of the Buddhistic age.
They used to consider petitions of people and also act as the Supreme Court of appeal.
Archaeological inscriptions of the Tenth and Eleventh centuries of the current era indicate that the institution of the Sabha or assembly in our country had achieved a high degree of efficiency.
These systems are still prevalent and function side by side with the modern system of representative democracy.
India today is recognized as a role model of a successful modern Constitutional parliamentary democracy.
The fact that we are operating in a highly pluralistic and diverse society beset with myriad challenges is also well known.
When we opted for parliamentary democracy as the governing model for free India, the world viewed us with scepticism, and even suspicion.
But, we have proved the prophets of doom wrong and maintained our unity, established a highly successful democracy and registered rapid economic growth.
The Parliament and Legislatures are the cornerstone on which rests the edifice of our democratic polity.
One of the basic objectives of a representative democracy is to see that governance is carried out keeping in mind the interests of the people and their needs and aspirations.
In a parliamentary democracy, the legislature represents the sovereign will of the people.
Friends, being a representative of the people is a matter of privilege and a great honour.
This privilege however carries with it great responsibility.
The job of a legislator is a 24/7 responsibility.
They have to be sensitive and responsive to the problems of the people and give voice to their grievances by raising them on the floor of the Legislature.
They must act as the link between the people and the Government.
The Legislative Assembly is a master of the Executive in the sense that the Chief Minister along with his Council of Ministers is accountable collectively and severally to the Legislative Assembly.
Moreover, most of the instruments of governance are executed through appropriate laws passed by Legislatures.
Elected representatives have exclusive control over money and finance.
No expenditure can be incurred by the Executive without approval of Legislature, no tax can be levied except by a law passed by the Legislature and no money can be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of the State without the approval of the Legislature.
With the heightened complexity of administration and legislation, Legislators must ensure adequate discussion and scrutiny before passing of legislation.
Our founding fathers dreamt of an India in which the three pillars of the State, namely, the legislature, the executive and the judiciary work in conjunction, exercising checks and balances on one another in a manner that ensures that its citizens can grow in an environment of freedom, justice and equality.
This separation of power avoids absolute concentration of power in any one organ of State.
The last few decades have shown that the founding fathers had chosen wisely and well, and that our people, have proved detractors to be wrong, and have made a wonderful success of our democracy, which is the largest in the world.
India has long standing civilizational bonds with its neighbours in South and South East Asia as well as East Asia.
The north east of India provides a natural bridge between us and South East Asia.
The essential philosophy of our Look East Policy, is that India must find its destiny by linking itself more and more with its Asian partners and the rest of the world.
We seek to make our neighbours partners in our development.
We believe that India's future and our own best economic interests are served by closer integration with Asia.
There is little time to be lost.
Considering the huge pool of natural resources and the quality of its human resources, the North East of India has the potential of being an important investment destination and a centre for trade and business.
No longer should this State be considered remote.
The Centre and State Government should together rapidly build the infrastructure linkages and connectivity with the rest of India that is required and this Legislature and the people of Arunachal should extend every assistance possible to this venture.
The State has a total hydropower potential of about 58,000 MW.
I am happy to know that projects of almost 46,000 MW hydro-power potential have been allotted for development to central public sector undertakings and various independent power producers of which majority of allotment is for development of projects in joint sector with the state government.
It is a challenge for the people and the State Government of Arunachal Pradesh as well as the Central Government to ensure that these Hydropower Projects are commissioned in time and the economy of Arunachal Pradesh gets a quantum jump to become one of the richest states in the country.
Since Arunachal Pradesh has common borders with three countries, the development of border areas is also vital and must receive our utmost attention.
The biggest asset of India as an emerging global economic power is our talented, forward looking and resourceful youth population.
The people of the Arunachal Pradesh are fast in learning, adaptable to change, open in their outlook and technology friendly.
They must be provided every opportunity possible to develop their innate talents and contribute to not just this state and country but entire humanity.
I am happy to note that the political leadership of the State is fully seized of the challenges and opportunities and is working sincerely to usher in a new era of peace and prosperity to its people.
There is nothing which can stand in the way of Arunachal Pradesh provided there is will and determination on the part of its people and leaders.
I wish all of you gathered here and the people of the state all success in your efforts to attain speedy and sustainable economic development of the state.
I call upon the Arunachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly to continue to maintain the highest standards of democratic practice and dedicate itself totally to the welfare of the people.
At the very outset, I would like to extend to you all my greetings and felicitations.
The coir industry, originating in Kerala came under the Coir Industries Act in 1953 followed by the establishment of this Board in 1954.
It has spread into other coconut growing States and today, thousands of household units are engaged in fibre extraction and spinning of coir yarn throughout the coir producing regions.
The industry employs about 7 lakh workers, predominantly women in more than 14 states and Union Territories.
I am told that even at the time when our exports were adversely affected by the global recession, our coir industry remained in a positive growth trajectory.
I am glad that in the 12th Plan, sufficient allocations have been made to this traditional agro-based cottage industry to enable it to expand further.
Coir does not pose health risks and nor does it create pollution.
I understand that in Europe and USA, our coir is even used for soil bio-engineering applications.
As this is an industry where 80% of the workforce is constituted by women, the importance of its modernization and upgradation of its infrastructure cannot be emphasized enough.
These steps are indispensable to bring about greater morale in the work force, higher productivity and better quality of products.
I was also glad to see that the Coir Board is taking several measures to improve the living conditions of coir workers and helping them to optimize the returns on their efforts and the resources invested by them.
There is also the problem of inadequate access to updated technology.
These are the areas where it is important for the coir industry to receive all the support that it can get.
I congratulate the Coir Board for its successful efforts and innovations - and its steady focus on market trends.
I appreciate its efficiency in converting information and knowledge swiftly into strategy and guidance for the participants in this industry.
I am sure that through its more than 42 sales outlets throughout the country, its research centres and its continuous innovation of new products to popularize this natural, eco-friendly fibre, the Coir Board will achieve the goal of significantly increasing revenues in this agro-based industry in the years to come.
With his vision and the support from the Government of India and the Government of West Bengal, this College has grown in stature to become an Institution of National Importance.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It widens our horizon and shapes our thinking.
Educational institutions beginning from schools, have to ensure that the core civilizational values of love for motherland; performance of duty; compassion for all; tolerance for pluralism; respect for women; honesty in life; self-restraint in conduct, responsibility in action and discipline are inculcated in the young minds of our students.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have only a few good quality institutions unlike our past when we had world class institutions of higher learning like Nalanda, Odantapuri, Somapura, Takshashila, Valabhi and Vikramashila.
We do not have today a single university or institution that can compete with the best universities in the world.
Reputed international surveys have ranked Indian institutions outside of the top two hundred places.
The recommendations made in the Conference are many and will require the cooperation and effort of all the NITs and their stakeholders to fulfill them.
They must identify one or two key departments in which they have core competence and nurture them into centres of excellence.
NITs must give greater priority to technology-enabled teaching like e-classrooms for wider diffusion of information and knowledge.
They must address faculty shortage on immediate basis so that the efforts at up-grading educational standards are not hampered.
They must contribute to reforms in curricula and evaluation.
They must strengthen the linkage with industry so that there is regular flow of inputs from industry experts on course curricula and research.
They must periodically evaluate their programmes based on industry trends.
A concrete step that they may take is to set up an Industry Cell in collaboration with local industry and industry associations.
This cell can establish contact with industrial units to develop collaborative research projects, internships, faculty exchanges and workshops.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
They must be able to guide policymakers in issues ranging from energy security to environment degradation, sanitation, urbanization, healthcare and education.
They have to become institutions of research apart from being institutions of learning.
I am happy to note that NIT Durgapur attaches equal importance to academics and research.
I am told that a drive to expand the research and academic infrastructure is under implementation in this Institute.
The faculty is encouraged to engage in active research while the students are initiated to research early and are provided financial support for research-related visits.
This Institute is performing exceedingly well and I am happy to note that four hundred and eleven papers were published in reputed journals last year.
Around sixty projects are presently being executed by the faculty.
Conferences, workshops and seminars are organized regularly by NIT Durgapur.
Seventeen such programmes were held this year.
I urge this Institute to continue maintaining the thrust on research.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The Indian innovation strategy must focus on generating ideas that promote inclusive growth and benefit those at the bottom of the socio-economic pyramid.
There are many grassroots innovations that can be developed into suitable products if provided with technological support.
Our higher academic institutions must play an important role in mentoring such innovative endeavours.
In the Conference of the Directors of NITs, a recommendation has been made to set up Innovation Clubs in all the NITs.
I call upon this Institute to take initiatives for putting innovation at the forefront of its priorities.
Distinguished guests,
It gives me great pleasure to be amongst you today on the occasion of the inauguration of the International Conference of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India.
This results in its own set of challenges and opportunities.
The biggest of these challenges is to ensure inclusive growth so that those who are at the margins and the periphery of the socioeconomic ladder are able to fully benefit from newer economic opportunities.
Without inclusive governance, inclusive growth cannot be achieved.
Our priority is achieving inclusiveness in governance, through participative decision making, and in the economy through equitable economic growth.
The literacy rate has increased significantly and stood at 74% in 2011.
After having attained self-sufficiency, we are now net exporters of food grains.
A noteworthy reduction in the incidence of poverty has been achieved.
Our economic growth rate has more than trebled.
Recently, however, there have been apprehensions expressed about our growth rates going into the future.
The decline in growth rates has been because of a combination of factors, both external and domestic.
I am hopeful that the resilient character of the Indian economy, along with the measures announced by Government and the bountiful monsoon this year, will help reverse this short term deceleration.
In fact, by discharging this responsibility in a proper manner, you create public trust not only in your profession but also in the entities you audit.
A hallmark of the accountancy profession is its obligation to act in the public interest.
The current spate of financial crises have only reinforced the role that the profession has to play in providing high quality financial information, facilitating market discipline and fostering confidence amongst various stakeholders in the financial markets.
They are also expected to provide truthful and effective communication with various stakeholders directly and indirectly related to the corporate governance processes for which they are accountable.
As part of an established profession, accounting professionals must apply high standards of ethical behavior and professional judgment; work with the regulators, and the government to develop and implement high-quality professional standards for financial reporting, auditing and assurance, ethics, public sector financial reporting and accounting education.
I am happy to note the various initiatives taken by ICAI to play a greater role in economic development and to uphold public confidence.
The profession has moved much beyond performing merely accountancy functions, and has been contributing by giving inputs to the Government and various regulators in the areas of financial markets, taxation, corporate laws, economic laws, banking, insurance, reforms in government accounting and has truly added value to the process of economic and social development in the country.
Recognizing the value you bring to the table, the Ministry of Rural Development has already requested the ICAI to play an active role in Gram Panchayat audits in connection with the MNREGA Scheme.
With formulation of Indian Accounting Standards which are IFRS compliant, India has got a definite edge over other countries of the world.
The ICAI has, through its intensive capacity building measures, also ensured that India today possesses a large pool of IFRS trained professional accountants.
India is once again on the verge of change.
The transformational agenda that we have boldly undertaken requires innovation and performance.
It requires huge resources but, more importantly, it requires judicious use of these resources so that we obtain optimal outcomes from these resources.
Every institution in the country must remodel itself for these momentous changes and must be ready to contribute.
Shri Jairam Ramesh, Minister of Rural Development,
Dr. Sam Pitroda, Chairman, National Innovation Council,
Delegates of Third Global Innovation Round Table,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Over the last three years, the Council has been undertaking various initiatives towards creating a Roadmap for Innovation in the country.
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Dr. Sam Pitroda, Chairman, National Innovation Council and his team for taking innovative steps for realization of the vision of the Government.
In the Indian context innovation is especially critical, not only for growth and development, but, because, we have a huge reservoir of unmet needs in critical areas of economy such as health, education, energy, housing and agriculture.
These needs have not been met through conventional approaches.
Innovation is thus critical to address the needs of our younger generation in a sustainable manner and for creating new opportunities for them.
Innovating in the areas of education, skill development, and entrepreneurship can enable our youth to emerge as the work force not only for India, but also for the world, as working age populations decline globally.
India, too, dedicated 2010-20 as a decade of innovation.
Government of India has announced a Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) Policy for innovation-led development.
The success of this policy will require creation of an eco-system, collaboration and adoption of best global practices for innovation activities to thrive.
I am happy that National Innovation Council has been working through international collaborations by inviting the top brains around the globe for Global Innovation Round Table.
The eco-system for innovation based on access, equity and excellence will ensure that innovation becomes a way of life in this country.
These new tools and platforms will have a massive impact on organisational structures, delivery models and business processes, where innovation will be critical.
We as a nation must be ready for this new wave of innovations.
This Indian approach of inclusive innovation can also emerge as a model for sustainable development for the world to emulate.
Many innovative ideas suffer due to lack of funding options.
This fund, through appropriate structure, will ensure that this does not happen in India any more.
These units are not functioning at the optimal level.
I am told that the National Innovation Council has been working towards the creation of an ecosystem for seeding innovations in these small and medium enterprises, by facilitating the creation of Innovation Clusters to drive job creation and productivity.
By successfully demonstrating 10 new products, 12 new processes and 2 new centres, the MSME cluster pilots have opened the doors for positive impact in these units benefitting over a million employees.
I am happy to note that this pilot initiative was through minimal incremental investments made by the stakeholders.
This initiative opens up a new window of opportunity for Small and Medium Enterprises to compete and grow using the low cost solutions.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
This would offer a collaborative and multi-disciplinary learning platform, where students enrolled in a primary college/university will be able to take courses available in other universities and colleges.
It may address the core concern of Indian higher education system which is facing shortage of quality manpower and infrastructure to deliver the quality education.
This initiative is an exciting step in fostering creative thinking and analytical skills amongst the students.
We have been making attempts through conventional means to improve the lives of people living in villages.
In spite of our best efforts, we are still away from our goal.
Government has launched an ambitious programme to connect two lakh fifty thousand Panchayats in the country through optic fibre based broadband.
The empowerment of people through innovative ICT applications will transform the way people live, think, work and take decisions in villages.
This will be closer to the dreams of Mahatma Gandhi, who saw villages as nerve centres of India.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The only way we can leapfrog to a status of a developed nation is by using innovation as a ladder.
I urge each and every citizen of this country to be a part of the innovation movement which has started in this country.
I also urge the universities, colleges and schools to be in the forefront of these innovation initiatives and contribute in all possible manners in realizing our goal of inclusive development and growth.
Jai Hind.
They are standing examples of hope and perseverance.
Their triumph over daunting disadvantages proves that any goals can be achieved against all odds - as long as we approach them with courage and determination and faith in ourselves.
I found that so many of them talked about an ability to see beyond what is visible and apparent, to see with their hearts, rely upon an inner vision and make an emotional connect with those that they interact with in a way that is almost magical and miraculous.
Vishal Rao, congenitally blind, managed to graduate in Political Science.
It is often thought that perhaps the sightless can see beyond the obvious - and perceive things in a more profound way than others do.
Greek mythology abounds with blind prophets who could see into the future.
Egyptian tombs have carvings of blind harpists who could communicate with the Gods.
Ancient Israel had revered its learned blind men who had exceptional powers.
And I am happy to see that Sipra has brought to us such remarkable frames in her deeply perceptive publication.
Sipra Das has given us an insight into the world of the individuals that she has photographed and written about - the realities of their daily lives and routines, their triumphs and tribulations.
They are calm and philosophical and almost inured to their sightlessness.
I was particularly struck by the simplicity of their approach and their intuitive understanding of the world around them.
Their experiences will, no doubt, give inspiration to not only those with similar challenges, but also to those of us who would like to reach out to help people like them.
We can make the visually challenged even more comfortable and enhance their capacity to participate in the different sectors of our socio-economic development
Theirs is an example of the power of the indomitable human spirit.
It is indeed a privilege for me to be present amidst you this afternoon at the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre.
This institution is itself the hub of our national research effort in the nuclear domain.
Indeed, BARC has emerged as an important place in the front rank in Atomic Research in the global nuclear map.
Dr.Bhabha established the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research in 1945, and post-independence, almost single-handedly created the architecture required to make India a nuclear power.
Dr.Bhabha was an institution builder, and laid an enduring and comprehensive foundation for the entire nuclear programme.
It has over the years served to produce a large pool of highly qualified scientists and researchers and ensured that our programme is self reliant.
It is essential that we harness energy from all the possible sources, conventional and non-conventional alike, for ensuring sustainable energy security.
The need for assured base-load energy availability throughout the year in all regions across our large country makes nuclear energy an indispensable option in the energy-mix for India.
In this context, Dr.Bhabha formulated a well-drawn-out three stage programme of nuclear power production, involving the closed fuel cycle option, to make full use of available nuclear fuel.
India has established mastery over the entire fuel cycle for the Pressurised Heavy Water Reactor based nuclear power plants in the first stage and is making progress in the march towards the second stage.
Work on the Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor at Kalpakkam is at an advanced stage.
The Civil Nuclear Cooperation Agreements concluded over the last eight years or so have ended our nuclear isolation and brought acknowledgement for the vigour and range of our nuclear programme.
We are today also involved in several multilateral mega-science initiatives, such as the CERN-LHC discovery of Higgs-Boson particle and the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor.
I call on the Atomic Energy community to gear up for the absorption of LWR technology, maximising synergies across indigenous and foreign technologies so that nuclear power can be delivered affordably and safely to the Indian masses.
Several other similar new facilities and systems in many more areas of application of technology require to be established and operated in the years to come.
The Tata Memorial Centre, an autonomous centre functioning under DAE administration, has created a name for itself.
The most popular crop mutant groundnut variety, called TAG-24, has been chosen to be dedicated today to the nation.
Isotopic techniques have led to a much better understanding of the recharge patterns, including of aquifers, and helped sustainable exploitation of ground water and surface water resources.
It has placed India among the very few advanced countries possessing nuclear submarine technology.
This technology is being upscaled to launch Indian Pressurised Water Reactor in the near future.
This is where the BARC School can play a key role.
We need highly qualified and competent nuclear scientists and engineers, professionals in the areas of nuclear safety and security as well as a new generation of project managers.
Let us not underestimate this challenge.
It is this thinking that should guide all of us throughout our life.
There are new challenges to be faced.
It is imperative that you, the young graduates, undertake public outreach measures, rigorously and systematically, to allay perceived fears and concerns about nuclear power.
You have been equipped with knowledge and the nation expects of you to contribute to the societal well being at large.
Our MSME units can prosper only if there is a concerted effort at widening the market for their products.
I am happy to know that IITF has been consistently helping in meeting the need of this crucial sector, thereby contributing towards meeting the ultimate goal of equitable and inclusive growth of the nation.
The fact that a country with a primarily agro-based economy and a burgeoning population could make its presence felt in diverse fields such as heavy industries, communication, nuclear energy, space research, electronics, etc., has been universally acknowledged by the international community.
The substantial growth rate that our country has achieved particularly in the last decade in the context of the global economic crisis speaks of the resilience of the Indian economy.
Exports have a very important role to play in the economic growth of our country and have the potential to drive the socio-economic development of our country.
The contribution that this sector makes to employment is of utmost importance to our vision of equitable and inclusive growth.
Hence, thrust should also be placed on meeting objectives like employment generation and regional development.
The last decade has marked a paradigm shift in the development approach towards improving the quality of life of our people.
Empowerment of people through entitlements backed by legal guarantees such as NREGA, RTE and Food Security Act have fostered the process of inclusive growth of the country.
In order to keep pace with the rapid global changes, we need to constantly fine-tune the skills of our work force.
There is an urgent need to incorporate skill development and vocational training in the process of our economic growth.
The vision of inclusiveness is not just removal of poverty but it encompasses equality of opportunity, as well as economic and social mobility for all sections of society.
This outcome can only be ensured if there is a degree of empowerment that creates a true feeling of participation, so necessary in a democratic polity.
Empowerment of the disadvantaged and marginalized groups is an essential part of inclusive growth.
The vision must also include a clear commitment to pursue a development process which is environmentally sustainable.
The international exposure offered by IITF to the domestic enterprises is most commendable.
I am sure that the IT and Telecom initiatives such as use of mobile application and live webcast of programmes will be highly useful for both visitors and exhibitors.
I compliment the organizers for these initiatives.
I extend my warm greetings and felicitations to all the countries participating in IITF and hope that our collective efforts would be rewarded by the best elements of international co-operation in various fields.
India-South Africa bilateral trade has almost doubled in the last four years.
I hope that the steadily increasing trade ties between India and South Africa continue to further strengthen in the years ahead.
Signing of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement with Japan in 2011 has provided a fillip to the already strong and friendly relationship between India and Japan.
We value our trade relations with Japan and are currently taking a number of initiatives, both in the Government as well as private sector, to strengthen our long standing trade and economic partnerships.
I hope the participating overseas as well as domestic companies go beyond the commercial gains of conducting business, to reach out to the core of the lives of people as a whole.
I am sure that the business as well as general visitors will find this Trade Fair interesting and useful.
I extend my greetings and good wishes to all participants and visitors in this Trade Fair.
Thank you.
I am indeed happy to be amidst you today on the occasion of the National Education Day celebrations.
This day is celebrated to commemorate the birth anniversary of the first Education Minister of India, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, a great visionary, freedom fighter, scholar, and eminent educationist.
We owe a great deal to the progress achieved in education in independent India to the direction and goals that Maulana Azad had envisioned for us.
On this occasion, I take the opportunity to salute and pay homage to this great visionary and architect of our education system.
We as a nation need to strive hard to turn his dreams into reality.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am glad to learn that NCERT organizes national level science exhibitions every year where children showcase their talents in science and mathematics and their applications in different areas related with our everyday life.
I understand that there are around one hundred and seventy exhibits on display in this exhibition, which represent the efforts made by thousands of students through district and state level feeder exhibitions organized last year.
Children have converged from various parts of our country to this meet to show case their scientific work.
I congratulate the National Council of Educational Research and Training for its endeavour to popularize science and mathematics and inculcate a scientific temper in the children of India.
I am confident that organisation of these exhibitions will enable the students and teachers to generate new scientific ideas for addressing problems relating to the society and environment.
On the one hand, we face challenges regarding conservation of our resources for future needs and on the other, the fulfilment of basic necessities of the ever increasing population continues to remain a persisting problem.
It is high time, we redefine the concept of development in a wider perspective, and try to find innovative ways based on scientific knowledge and mathematical understanding to tackle them.
There should be no confrontation between the environment considerations and development requirements.
The problem can be compounded further by poverty, hunger, malnutrition and illiteracy, if appropriate steps are not taken immediately.
It is imperative to face the situation squarely and adopt a scientific and mathematical approach to the performance of tasks at hand.
There is a need to make our children aware of the nexus between problems like unchecked population growth and energy crisis, depletion of natural resources, pollution of the environment, and so on.
Towards this end, our younger generation needs to be made not only aware but also responsive to all the issues which have a direct bearing on our society.
We should encourage children to visualise the future of the nation and help them become sensitive and responsible citizens.
Science and Mathematics are powerful ways of investigating and understanding the world.
It is, therefore, extremely important to inculcate the ethos of science and mathematics in the minds of our young students who are the future scientists and technologists of this nation.
Sikkim, where the exhibition is being held this year is well known for its rich biodiversity and the pro-conservation policies followed by its Government.
I urge our young participants to regard the five elements of life: Earth, Water, Energy, Space and Air as something that we have inherited and that we have to pass on to the next generation.
We have no right to squander or pollute them because we do not own them.
This does not mean that we should not pursue science, develop technology and strive to improve the quality of human life, but while doing this we should take care not to disturb the delicate balance of our compound ecosystem.
All the natural elements that sustain life on earth are inter-connected and exhibit the highest order of coordination; and any disturbance caused to any one of them will lead to imbalance in nature as a whole.
We simply cannot afford to do that.
Education is a necessary tool for national progress, human empowerment and social change.
The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, and the inclusion of Article 21-A in the Constitution of India has far reaching implications for elementary education and for the implementation of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), in the years to come.
Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) focuses on strengthening of the secondary school system in the country so as to raise enrolment in secondary education, reduce the gender, social and regional gaps in enrolment and improve school retention.
In higher education, a plethora of reforms are being introduced to increase access and ensure meaningful quality.
The thrust should be on inclusive education and the three Es of expansion, equity and excellence in education across all levels.
Teachers should inspire students to imbibe correct values and shape future citizens having a sound character.
There is a need to give greater focus on female literacy as well as the synergy between literacy and skill development.
We must focus on technology enabled learning in all the institutions across the country and empower the faculty and students to harness technology for improving the quality of education.
Increased use of technology solutions to address the problems of accessibility, quality and faculty shortage is necessary.
Accessibility and affordability are key steps for inclusion.
In a world marked by resource constraints, growth will increasingly depend on technology up-gradation.
India has dedicated 2010-20 as the Decade of Innovation.
The Science, Technology and Innovation Policy, unveiled this year, calls for mentoring grassroots innovation.
Innovation in science and technology can lead to the development of new products and processes which could act as catalysts for growth.
Therefore, Research & Innovation needs to play a vital role in our education system.
Further, our drive towards innovation should benefit those at the bottom of the socio-economic pyramid.
I am sure the visionary perspectives of Maulana Azad will continue to inspire and guide us to build a knowledge society.
Remember that Science, Technology and Innovation is the key to progress and prosperity for our nation.
Always move forward with an open mind and strive to reach new heights.
I congratulate you on attaining this momentous milestone in your history.
This prestigious school has witnessed the changing fortunes of this country, its people and more intimately its students and faculty from the year 1888.
I am glad to know this school boasts of a great dramatic tradition of operettas and music; of speech and debating; of scouting, the NCC, Mountaineering and Leadership Training Service.
I also understand students undertake a Winter Camp where needy neighbourhood children are invited to the school for lessons and provided free meals, scholarships and access to all facilities.
It is important that compassion and concern for the under privileged in society is inculcated in our children at an early age so that they can become change agents who transform India and lead her to a better future.
It is also through such activities where children are given space in freedom, and challenged to develop their talents, skills, attitudes and values that true education happens.
Education is synonymous with life itself.
There is need for constant adaptation and re-inventing to be relevant to the modern times.
There is need for constant efforts to upgrade our education system, at both the school and university levels.
India has today enacted the Right to Education Act which is a land mark legislation that seeks to ensure that every child up to 14 years attends school.
But mere attendance in school is not enough.
The education imparted must be of quality and teachers well trained.
The system should enable the nurturing of children who are not just good at academics but also rooted in our civilizational values and filled with energy and drive to serve society.
At the time of adoption of our Constitution, we pledged to provide free and compulsory education for children.
This commitment was enshrined in Article 45 of the Constitution in the Directive Principles of State Policy.
This was made a fundamental right in 2002 when Article 21A was inserted in the Constitution through the 86th Constitutional Amendment Act.
The Right to Education Act (RTE) which was passed by the Government of India in 2009 is thus fulfilment of a commitment that we gave to ourselves in 1950.
Education is a powerful tool for social transformation.
Some recent incidents of brutal assault on women and children has shaken the collective conscience of our nation.
These unfortunate incidents underscore the need for us to introspect and find solutions to arrest the erosion of values in our society.
Swami Vivekananda believed that education should build character.
It is only a broad outlook, unhampered by regionalism, unencumbered by parochialism, unhindered by prejudices that can make this nation great and ideal enough to lead the world.
We must be increasingly mindful of the sensitivities of those around us and how they may be affected by our words and deeds.
Similarly, we must strive to continuously generate greater tolerance and understanding among all sections of our democratic society.
I urge the students in the audience to stride onto paths of life with a positive attitude and strong spirit.
Besides training and education, what will keep you in good stead is strength of character, mind and purpose.
I would like you to remember that knowledge should be always used in the service of the people and society.
I congratulate the Provincial, Fr Rector, Members of the Jesuit Community, the teachers, the co-workers, the support staff, the students and the parents both past and present for 125 years of service to the community in Darjeeling, in India and the world at large.
I am happy to learn that so many leaders across different countries and walks of life are a part of your history and identity.
Many members of the Royal Families of Bhutan, Nepal and erstwhile Sikkim learned their statecraft here.
125 years spans a vast canvas of lives and events that are woven intimately into the rich tapestry of your history.
I take with me memories and pictures of an institution alive to and ready for the challenges of today and the future.
I take this opportunity to thank the Jesuits on behalf of the citizens of our country for blessing India with so many great institutions and organisations, for your charitable work and for enhancing the quality of the human resources that pass through your nurturing hands.
I am happy to join you on the occasion of the 44th Convocation of IIT Delhi.
It is my privilege to be amidst you in this beautiful campus.
Your dedication, sincere effort and academic brilliance have led you to this level of achievement.
Today is the beginning of your life-long process of learning for which IIT Delhi and its excellent faculty has equipped you.
But knowledge must also bring in humility.
Humility teaches you to appreciate others, enables you to acknowledge that there can be a number of equally valid approaches to meet the same objective.
Humility inculcates in you the ability to assess yourself critically in the context of the society and the country.
Be broad-minded and tolerant.
Never lose the zeal and spirit to question.
Have the strength to defend what you think is right.
These qualities, which your alma mater has instilled in you, will be useful as you move forward in your career.
IIT Delhi has vigorously pursued its dream of creating an infrastructure of excellence and in this process through its glorious existence of over 50 years, IIT Delhi has positioned itself firmly on the global map.
The country is proud of the contribution of these alumni in creating the technological manpower for our nation building and economic development.
Today, the IIT Delhi has become a global brand amongst the employers, academicians, scientists and industrialists.
You are going to join this growing and expanding list of alumni of this prestigious institute.
Always remember your alma mater and participate actively in the further growth of this great institute.
I expect each one of you to make this institute proud of your achievements.
The success of the students, apart from their own intelligence and hard-work, also depends largely on mentoring during their student-ship.
I am happy to note that the faculty of IIT Delhi has contributed in creating a class of students, whose knowledge is based on core areas of science and technology.
This systematic development of scientific and technological manpower has enabled India to emerge as a knowledge power house.
Excellence in education has direct impact on the society.
High quality education can improve the quality of life for all citizens.
It can transform the society into a meritocracy where a person succeeds because of ability and hard-work.
IITs have nurtured excellence.
Shedding of the shackles of mediocrity is the key challenge for IIT system and IITians in the 21st century.
The answer to this challenge lies in your heads and hearts, as you all are going to govern the society and the system in future.
A large number of Indian students are moving to foreign destinations chasing their dreams of quality higher education.
We all have to move quickly and collectively to achieve the desired objectives.
The number of IITs has also increased to 16.
The IITs in the early sixties were set up in collaboration with the friendly countries, which provided support to India in realizing its dream of becoming a country with a scientific temperament.
This hand-holding by the institutions of the friendly countries to IITs has also given us a model for future.
The time has come when the established and old IITs have to provide the same kind of support and hand-holding to new IITs and other institutions of national importance in bringing them on the international map of higher and technical education.
Only through such collaborations, we can ensure that the aspirations of younger generations for access to quality education are fulfilled.
I am sure; all of you will join in making this happen in the years to come.
Knowledge is the currency of modern economy.
IITs, including IIT Delhi, need to take giant leap as contributor of new knowledge.
This can happen only by further strengthening and enhancing post-graduate education and research in the IITs.
We know that IIT Delhi is pursuing top-class research in a number of areas like nano-technology, smart textiles, communication systems, algorithms and environmental sciences.
But IITs have so far not been very successful in attracting its under-graduates to post-graduate education and research.
IITs should devise some strategy to have under-graduates joining their PG programmes.
I understand that very few IIT graduates are pursuing specialized education leading to Ph.D. or any other higher degree.
In the long term this will deprive country of the talented specialized technical personnel who are the most important assets in a knowledge economy.
Many of the advanced countries and some of the developing countries are creating and owning the intangible assets through patents filing.
This is happening due to emphasis on research and development.
India, in spite of its strong scientific and technical manpower base, is still far behind in creation of intangible assets and ownership of patents.
In IITs, against the total student strength of 60,000 there are around 3000 Ph.D. students.
This indicates that bright students are not taking up research and innovation in adequate numbers.
If we can orient these students towards the research, then later on they can join as faculty in IITs and other institutes of national importance.
This may help us in meeting the faculty shortages faced by our technical institutions, including IITs.
India has 119 researchers in R & D per million people, as compared to 715 of China and 468 of the United States.
We need to improve ourstanding in terms of publications and researchers employed in R & D field.
This is possible only if the brightest students take up research and development at young age.
The Committee has laid down a roadmap to increase the number of Ph.D. students in IIT system ten-fold in about ten years and also to increase the number of faculty in IIT system to 16,000 in about ten years.
The road map should be expeditiously followed to see that India emerges as a leader in the field of research, innovation and patents.
I urge graduating under-graduates to rethink about their careers options.
The satisfaction, the excitement that you can get by generating new knowledge can never be matched by financial benefits.
This country needs to produce not thousands but lakhs of Ph.D. for India to become a technical super power.
IIT Delhi through its innovative schemes can really take a lead in this direction and become a role model for other institutions to follow.
How you utilize your second birth is in your hands.
You are the master of your destiny in this journey and you have been fully equipped by the able faculty of IIT Delhi.
I extend a warm welcome to all of you to this Conference of Directors of National Institutes of Technology, which is being held for the first time in the Rashtrapati Bhavan.
We gather today just two days after India attained a very significant milestone in the field of space exploration through the launch of the Mangalaayan Mission, which was totally an indigenous effort.
Our space scientists and engineers have repeatedly demonstrated that given determination, leadership, hard work and resources, India is fully capable of attaining global excellence in fields of frontier technology.
I am confident that the example set by ISRO can be emulated in a large number of other sectors in our country.
Engineers play a very important role in every walk of life.
They convert knowledge of basic sciences into products.
They are versatile minds who build bridges between sciences, technology and society.
Our IITs and NITs play an important role by nurturing world class engineers who are not only professionally competent but also committed to mastering frontier areas of technology, improving the quality of life of our people and taking our nation to new heights of achievement.
The substantial growth rate that our country has achieved over the last few years is second only to China in the world.
If we have to attain a growth rate of 9 per cent per year, as has been envisaged during the Twelth Five Year Plan period, we must put in place enabling factors, most prominent of which is quality of higher education.
Over time, we have created a large network of educational institutions.
India has today 659 degree awarding institutions and 33,023 colleges.
The number of Indian Institutes of Technology has increased from 7 in 2006-07 to 15 in 2011-12.
The number of National Institutes of Technology (NITs) has increased from 20 in 2006-07 to 30 in 2011-12.
It must also be noted that six of the ten new NITs are located in the North East India.
Enrolment to higher education institutions in the country has increased, from 1.39 crores in 2006-07 to 2.18 crores in 2011-12.
Engineering comprised 13 per cent of the total enrolment in 2006-07.
This figure has since increased to around 25 per cent.
The growth rate of enrolment in Engineering, which was close to 25 per cent annually during the Eleventh Plan period, is the highest for any field of individual study.
Distinguished Directors, Ladies & Gentlemen,
This conference draws its inspiration from the successful outcome of a Conference of Vice Chancellors of Central Universities, I convened earlier this year in my capacity as Visitor of those Universities.
The Conference of Central University Vice Chancellors resulted in a number of important recommendations.
These are being vigorously pursued by the Vice Chancellors themselves and the Ministry of Human Resource Development, giving me confidence there would be visible change by the time we meet for the next Conference of Vice Chancellors in February 2014.
I am thankful to the respected Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh, a celebrated academic himself, for his presence today.
Over the last nine years, the Government led by him has prioritised higher education and supported it with increased resources.
The NITs of India must play a central role in leading the drive for quality engineering education across the country.
Despite significant growth in the number of higher education institutions, we have few institutions of global standards.
Famed seats of higher learning like Takshashila, Nalanda, Vikramashila, Valabhi, Somapura and Odantapuri were a magnet for scholars across the world.
We must reclaim the position.
Distinguished Directors, Ladies & Gentlemen,
It is not difficult to see where our institutions stand today vis a vis the best in the world.
Apart from the leading universities of the West, universities in countries like China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Brazil, Mexico, South Africa and Malaysia are ranked higher than Indian institutions.
The highest ranked Indian institution in the QS Ranking is IIT Delhi, at the 222nd position.
Only eleven Indian institutions including seven IITs have earned a rank in the QS list of 700.
Not a single NIT is amongst these institutions.
The rankings process needs to be taken seriously not just for the ranks per se but for the fact that high ranking helps us attract the best faculty from across the world, significantly improve the prospects of good placements for graduating students and provide a benchmark for continuous quality enhancement.
During my recent visit to Belgium and Turkey, I had the privilege of being accompanied by a delegation of Vice Chancellors of Central Universities as well as the UGC Chairman.
I used the visit to provide impetus to the international collaboration efforts of these Universities.
Vice Chancellors held discussions with their counter parts and many were able to conclude MOUs on future cooperation with leading Universities of these two countries.
I hope to follow the same practice with NITs in future.
There is need for regular revision and up-gradation of curricula, introduction of choice-based credit system, examination reforms and promotion of a culture of excellence.
At least one or two departments in every NIT must be turned into Centres of Excellence.
Formal linkages must be built with the Industry so that there is regular flow of inputs from industry experts on course curricula and research.
Engineering programmes must be also periodically evaluated based on industry trends.
Shortage of faculty is a serious problem across all institutions.
Filling up of existing vacancies on priority must be ensured.
A healthy faculty-student ratio must be maintained so that students are able to receive the kind of attention they require.
Quality of instruction must be improved and teaching made an attractive career option for bright students.
Teachers must be encouraged and facilitated to participate in international seminars, refresher courses and project work so that they benefit from wider perspectives and knowledge reciprocity.
Distinguished Ladies & Gentlemen,
Technology must be harnessed to deliver education effectively.
Expertise in key areas must be leveraged by developing networks.
The National Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology must be used to give impetus to such efforts.
NITs, as knowledge generating institutions, must interact closely with one another and other technical and research institutions.
The National Knowledge Network envisages optical fibre connectivity between fifteen hundred institutions.
I understand 28 out of the 30 NITs are now on this network and two are in the process of being connected.
The remaining two must also get connected without any delay.
I am told there are some connectivity issues with the NKN.
The BSNL has therefore been also asked to send a representative to this Conference.
Our NITs must ensure regular interaction and collaboration with their counterparts in India and abroad.
Similarly, there must be consistent efforts to build a symbiotic relationship with the industry.
All our institutions have outstanding teachers who can shape the thoughts of young minds.
Through words, actions and deeds, such teachers inspire students and elevate them to a higher level of performance and thinking.
They instil correct values in their students.
They must be encouraged to share their knowledge and wisdom with the larger academic community.
There is need to emphasize research and innovation in NITs.
Out of the total student strength of 71,000 in NITs, there are only 4000 Ph.D. students.
In IITs, there are only around 3000 Ph.D students in the total student strength of 60,000.
India ranks 12th amongst top 20 countries, in terms of publications on science and technology.
We have 119 researchers in R & D per million people, as compared to 715 of China and 468 of United States.
NITs must evolve clear strategies to encourage research and development, which then leads on to innovation and patents.
In a world marked by resource constraints, growth will increasingly depend on technology up-gradation.
Governments around the world are making concerted efforts to encourage innovation.
India, too, dedicated 2010-20 as a Decade of innovation.
A Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) Policy has been formulated for innovation-led development.
This policy calls for creation of an eco-system wherein innovation activity can thrive.
Engineering institutions like NITs must work towards making the STI policy a success.
They must mentor grassroots innovators to develop their ideas into useful products that benefit the common man.
The Conference of Vice Chancellors of Central Universities recommended the setting up of Innovators Clubs which would act as a platform for faculty and students to interact with grassroots innovators in their vicinity.
I hope NITs will also follow suit.
The Government has appointed a Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Kakodkar to recommend comprehensive reforms of NITs.
Dr. Kakodkar will make a presentation to the Conference on a roadmap that could be followed in turning NITs into Centres of Excellence.
The HRD Minister has informed of acceptance of major recommendations of the Committee by Government.
I hope the deliberations over these two days will focus on the strategies necessary for improving quality across all parameters of engineering education and knowledge development.
After two days of discussions, I expect concrete deliverables which we can all take forward.
A time bound plan of action should be drawn up for implementation.
Progress achieved on implementation will be reviewed when we meet next.
We must equip our youth with necessary skills and jobs.
The Government is investing huge amount of resources in higher education.
We must lead our institutions into the ranks of the best such institutions in the world.
I call upon all of you who are leaders in the field of scientific and technical education in India to address yourself whole heartedly to this task with a sense of urgency.
I assure you the full support of the Government in this regard.
It gives me immense pleasure to witness the Passing Out parade of the Indian Police Service (IPS) Probationers at the National Police Academy, which is the premier police training institution in our country.
These are moments of pride and accomplishment.
I extend my warm congratulations to all the officer trainees on their successful completion of the challenging training curricula and prior to that of passing a very difficult competitive examination which speaks of your academic excellence.
I am happy that the participants in this parade include 04 officers from the Royal Bhutan Police Service, 03 from the Maldives Police Service and 05 from the Nepal Police Service.
I extend a very warm welcome to them.
I am sure the bonds forged during the training will further strengthen the relations between our friendly nations.
It is also noteworthy that there are 25 lady police officers in this batch.
I congratulate you and welcome you to the elite Indian Police Service.
This is my second visit to the National Police Academy.
In 1993, I visited this Academy as Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission.
A Civil Servant cannot afford to, and must not take part in politics.
Nor must he involve himself in communal wrangles.
To depart from the path of rectitude in either of these respects is to debase public service and to lower the dignity.
I compliment the officers of the Indian Police Service for their commitment, dedication, sincerity and willingness to make the supreme sacrifice in the cause of the nation.
As far as the Police forces in the country are concerned, there is no room whatsoever for Complacency.
The nation has great expectations from you.
My vision of the Police for future India is not that of only a law enforcing body, but of a pro-active service provider, a partner in growth, development and peace.
As police officers, you should always ensure that the grievances of the common man are redressed.
This would require a change of role of the police from a reactive to a pro-active agency, which, in partnership with other stake holders will create a peaceful and secure atmosphere conducive to the growth and prosperity of our nation.
I expect from you the highest degree of professionalism at all times and consistent efforts to ensure that the rule of law is enforced in letter and spirit.
Police Constables are the visible face of Government and therefore enough attention should be paid for their training and development and improvement in their service conditions.
Inculcating in them the highest degree of discipline, integrity and commitment is absolutely necessary.
They are the cutting-edge of your work force and the image of the Police overall depends on their conduct, behaviour and professionalism.
The public forms an opinion about the quality of governance based on the response and efficiency of policemen at the grass roots level.
These are challenging times for our police forces.
There has been a worrying bout of communal violence in some parts of our country, accompanied by deterioration in inter-community relations.
There is need to strengthen the ability of our district and local Administration to notice such tensions in their initial stages and take necessary measures to contain them quickly.
Atrocities against women and children have also grabbed public attention and shaken the conscience of our nation in recent times.
Effective policing of our urban areas, especially the metropolitan cities and protecting the vulnerable requires urgent attention of our police forces.
The Justice Verma Committee has reiterated the importance of overall police reforms in the country.
It is essential that we make progress in this regard, taking on board all concerned stake holders.
Our country has made progress in many fields.
There is a need to provide a safe and secure environment for the successful implementation of the people oriented schemes of the Government of India.
India continues to be targeted by terrorism from abroad, as well as threats from within, to our internal security.
The Government is committed to dealing with Left Wing Extremism in a comprehensive manner.
While we must meet these challenges head on and address them with determination and persistence, the actions of our police forces must respect the human rights of our people and the letter and spirit of our Constitution.
I am sure that with motivated, self confident and sensitive leadership, our police forces can and will effectively deal with the challenges before the nation.
I am confident that each one of you, the latest entrants into the Indian Police Service will provide exemplary leadership to the men and women you will command and do our country proud in the coming years.
My good wishes to you all once again.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
Commandant National Defence College, Vice Admiral Sunil Lanba, AVSM, members of the faculty and staff, officers from the Indian Armed Forces, Civil Services and from friendly foreign countries.
It gives me immense pleasure to welcome you all to Rashtrapati Bhavan.
Astonishing pace at which the events have unfolded in the recent past could not have been foreseen even a decade earlier.
The power relationships are constantly changing, and unless a country understands and adjusts itself to the changes that are taking place around it, its own security will be seriously endangered.
Intensive research and quality analysis in all the fields and disciplines is thus a pre requisite which calls for a holistic approach to studies across the vast spectrum of disciplines.
There must be a conscious effort to strengthen the underlying linkages and not divide them into watertight compartments.
Adopting such an approach will yield rich dividends.
At the same time, one must not lose sight of the larger picture and keep the primary objective of the research always in focus.
The development of human resource for National Security is an onerous task undertaken by your Institute, National Defence College of India where senior officers from not only armed forces but also from civil services and friendly foreign countries are endowed with the background knowledge to make policy decisions related to national security.
Political leadership and senior Civil Services officers must be conversant with the capabilities and limitations of the defence forces.
Similarly, Armed Forces officers need to understand the limitations and constitutional frame work under which political setup and Civil Services function.
However, both of them should be aware of larger perspective of National Security in order to take informed decision of vital importance.
The Socio-Political Study is to make you comprehend the main features of the Indian society and polity and to assess issues which have a bearing on National Security.
The Economy, Science and Technology Study is to introduce you to the principles and practices that shape economic trends as well as influence of science and technology in attaining self reliance in security related fields.
The final study on Strategies and Structures for National Security is the synthesis and culmination of everything that has been learned and experienced during the year.
Multidisciplinary approach to problems of national security was even recognised in the earlier days.
It is clear that future conflicts in the complex defence and security environment will require a more integrated multi-state and multi-agency approach.
Preparing military leaders, police officers and civil servants to deal with complex security environment of the future will necessarily have to be addressed in a holistic, integrated and comprehensive manner.
Jai Hind!
It is indeed a privilege for me to be present amidst you this morning and to participate in the inaugural session of the Second India Water Forum.
I am happy to be given this opportunity to address this distinguished gathering of water sector experts, researchers, academicians, policy makers and students.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Water security, which already is a formidable challenge, is going to aggravate in the future.
This Conference, by focusing on water use efficiency, will help to bring this important issue to the forefront of policy discourse.
The improvement of water use efficiency requires innovative tools of promotion and incentives for efficient water utilization.
At the same time, it calls for dealing with inefficient water consumption through disincentives and stricter regulation.
In the past, focus was laid primarily on augmenting the quantity of water available without giving due attention to the manner in which the water will be used or managed.
For that, the existing institutions involved in service delivery have to be restructured and strengthened.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
By altering river flows, decreasing groundwater recharge, intensifying floods and droughts, and allowing salt water intrusion in coastal aquifers, climate change can severely affect water resources.
This challenge has to be met by efficient water management.
One of the most important goals of the National Water Mission is to increase water use efficiency by twenty per cent.
But due to unprecedented urbanization, urban water demand has compelled the shift of water resources from rural to urban consumers creating an inter-sectoral rivalry.
With the sources of water remaining unchanged, this inter-sectoral competition over allocation of water is likely to rise in future.
Addressing this situation calls for efficient allocation of water between various sectors.
Water management in this sector is therefore crucial for overall sustainability of our water resource.
The 3 R strategy of reduce, recycle and reuse has to find application in our farmlands.
Rain water harvesting has to be popularized by dovetailing existing rural development schemes like Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee scheme.
Our initiatives at integrated watershed development have to aim at increasing the soil moisture, reducing the sediment yield and improving water productivity.
The pricing mechanism has to act as an incentive for saving and disincentive for wastage.
The role of water users associations has to be strengthened by giving them adequate powers for collection of water charges and management of the water distribution system.
There is a significant portion of humanity which remains denied of access to this basic necessity.
The reach of the poor to safe drinking water has to be enhanced by developing mid-market technologies that can deliver affordable water treatment devices.
Micro finance institutions have to be engaged to acquire devices and encourage shared access to safe drinking water.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
A broad over-arching national legal framework of general principles on water could pave the way for essential legislation on water governance in the country.
Concerted effort is also required to make the water sector policies and regulations clear, coordinated and comprehensive.
Only then can India hope to mitigate the impact of the looming water crisis.
With the expertise that TERI commands in areas like integrated water resources management, climate change, and domestic and industrial water management, I am happy that it has chosen to take the lead in organizing this event.
I am most certain that this three day Conference will witness comprehensive and dispassionate deliberations on various aspects of water use efficiency, which will help to develop a consensual understanding on water use management.
I hope that this convention will showcase advanced knowledge and successful technologies developed in different countries and promote international knowledge exchange for addressing challenges related to water security.
I wish the organizers the very best in successfully conducting this conference.
I also wish them all success in their endeavours.
Thank you.
The Preamble to the Constitution of India lays emphasis on justice in all its forms: Social, Economic and Political.
An effective justice delivery system requires that justice should not only be delivered on time, but should also be easily accessible to people, particularly people from vulnerable sections of society.
In order to provide speedy and quality justice accessible to the ordinary citizens, there is urgent need to reform our judicial system.
Our approach to reform must be guided by a thorough understanding of current shortcomings and future needs of the system.
Historically, the focus of judicial reform has been the judiciary.
The ideal Indian lawyer must not only have excellent legal skills, but also embody social responsibility and strong professional ethics.
The efficacy of the rule of law depends to a large extent on the integrity of lawyers who are the link between the citizen and the system of justice.
The first generation of judicial reforms in our country established the National Law Schools and have demonstrated that India can have institutions that impart affordable but world class legal education.
The second generation of reforms should now focus on Continuing Legal Education of lawyers, judges, judicial officers, bureaucrats and academics.
Due to globalization and opening up of our various sectors for foreign direct and indirect investment, new challenges in legal field are emerging.
Further, India has ratified, signed or adopted various International instruments and has made variety of commitments in different International agreements, treaties and conventions.
Cases relating to our obligations and commitments made in these agreements like Bilateral Investment Protection Agreements, other treaties and conventions are also reaching the courts of law and International as well as domestic Arbitral Tribunals.
Handling of these specialized kinds of cases requires great skills and experience.
In some cases, role of international and domestic law also come into play together.
Members of the Bar are therefore required to adequately equip themselves with competence to represent in those matters.
In these Centers, judges must have an opportunity to interact with distinguished people from various disciplines so that they can be made aware of ground realities which will help them in effective discharge of their onerous tasks.
Establishing a comprehensive system of Continuing Legal Education will enhance professionalism, accountability and public respect for lawyers.
It would be also useful in this regard for the Bar Council of India to consider setting up a world class institution for Continuing Legal Education similar to the National Law Schools.
Now, let me turn to the subject of Juvenile Justice.
The future of our nation depends on the proper upbringing of our children.
When provided adequate opportunity and guidance, they have immense potential to contribute to society and humanity.
But if neglected and deprived, they may develop deviant and destructive behaviour causing irreparable damage to society.
Children require to be protected from exploitation, moral hazards, anti-social activities and brought up in a congenial atmosphere.
They should have the opportunity to receive education, acquire comprehensive knowledge and develop in a child friendly environment so that they turn into good human beings with a mission in life.
India is home to the largest child population in the world and more than one third of the country's population is under eighteen years of age.
We are currently debating and grappling with several issues related to juvenile justice including the question of age and treatment of juveniles who may have the mental capacity to judge their actions.
The reformative approach of the JJ law has come into question and there is demand for a law which has a deterrent effect, where the guilty are punished in accordance with the nature of the offence they commit, irrespective of their age.
This debate is not exclusive to India.
The thinking and understanding of juvenile justice across the world is still at a developmental stage.
The discourse and law varies from one country to another, depending on their approach to human rights, their legal and technical capacities and their governance system.
The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences, Act, 2012 (POCSO) is one of the most recent initiatives for protection of children in India.
This Act was introduced in 2012 to put in place a strong system for protecting children from any form of sexual abuse.
There was a felt need for such legislation as statistics revealed that sexual crimes against children were steadily increasing.
The incidence of minors getting raped in the country were seen to be on the rise over the past six years and in 2012 the figures touched the shocking number of 8,541.
This Act has now been in place for over a year and even in this short period, several implementation challenges have emerged.
These need to be urgently addressed in order to make this legislation truly effective.
The Government has introduced in 2009 an Integrated Child Protection Scheme to implement the JJ Act.
This Scheme, creates a safety net of Service Delivery Structures at National, State & District level; puts in place a cadre of trained personnel working exclusively on Child Protection; provides a range of need based services for each child and brings together existing initiatives and new measures for protection.
Sadly, lack of information and sensitivity amongst service providers is among the principle reasons for the failure of the system.
There is need for greater awareness of POCSO on the part of adults, parents, caregivers, teachers and people in positions of authority.
Service providers at all levels also need to be sensitized and their capacities built.
Bar Councils such as yours can richly contribute to strengthening implementation of this legislation and ensuring the operation of an effective, just, child sensitive Juvenile Justice system.
I hope discussions in this Seminar will evolve a road map in the above regard.
Both the themes chosen for deliberation are of immense contemporary relevance.
I have no doubt this Seminar will witness a purposeful exchange and sharing of information and experience.
During the last three days that I have been privileged to be in your beautiful and friendly country I have felt the warmth and welcome of the Turkish people.
Today your amity and goodwill are manifest with this invitation to me to share a meal with you.
The warmth that I have perceived in our interactions today is reflective of the potential that exists for bringing our two countries closer.
I accept this as a tribute to our shared cultural, linguistic, social and civilizational experiences.
For me and my delegation, it has been a privilege and pleasure to be here and to learn firsthand about Turkey, its people, its history and its grandeur.
I thank you, Excellency, for having invited me for this visit.
I look forward, Excellency, to welcome you in my own country, India.
Our countries share bonds that go beyond a mere sharing of cultural heritage, arts and cuisine.
As two emerging economies with congruent interests in several cross cutting areas, we should aim to reap the benefits of closer interaction.
Our developing societies can engage across sectors; we are looking forward to enhancing academic exchanges and people to people contact.
Being members of the G-20, we interact closely on issues affecting the global community.
We are at historical cross roads; the decisions we take today will influence the future of this relationship.
Excellency, it is my ardent hope that as two independent nations we will work together to make this world a better and safer place to live in and take our bilateral relations to greater heights of cooperation and mutual understanding.
I am carrying back very fond memories of my visit to Turkey.
Excellency, please join me in raising a toast for your health, and the progress and prosperity of the Turkish people.
Let us rededicate ourselves to making our two countries focal points that will usher in peace and stability for our respective regions, and for the world as a whole.
Rector of Istanbul University Professor Dr Yunus Soylet,
Dean faculty of Political Sciences, Professor Dr Emra Cengiz,
Distinguished Guests
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Let me begin by extending to the friendly people of Turkey, warm greetings and good wishes from the people of India, the Indian Government and from my own self.
I would like to express my appreciation to the Istanbul University for honouring me today with the Doctorate, Honoris Causa, in Political Science.
I am privileged to receive this honour from Istanbul University which, like the city itself, is steeped in history and has been a bridge connecting two disparate land continents and civilizations.
I am indeed proud and privileged to be here.
There is a 200 strong Indian diaspora in your beautiful country, which is a vibrant community in its own right.
Their ethos, experience and expertise help in cementing stronger ties of friendship, goodwill and mutual understanding between our peoples.
I thank the Government, Universities, employers and people of Turkey, who have extended their hand of friendship to our diaspora here.
This people-to-people link is a great asset in the building of closer bilateral relations between our two countries.
The statement read out by the Dean of Political Sciences, Professor Dr. Emra Cengiz, explained that the conferment of the Honorary Degree, Doctor of Letters, Honoris Causa, to me was on account of my achievement as someone who has spent decades in political life and contributed to governance and democracy in India.
While I am humbled by this honour, this recognition, in my view, is due to the Indian nation and its people.
India is a developing economy.
It has pursued a democratic model of governance to provide opportunity for the development of every individual.
When we started our journey of democracy in 1947, we were a new nation with a handful of challenges.
We have overcome trials and tribulations and grown in strength to be a vibrant democracy today.
Our democratic foundation is built on the three pillars of Parliament, the Executive and the Judiciary.
The Parliament is a sacred institution that reflects the will of the people.
The Members of our Parliament are the chosen representatives of the people who carry their hopes and aspirations and resonate their grievances.
The accountability of the Executive to the people for its actions is exercised through the Parliament.
We share with Turkey a deep commonality in our respective political structures.
The success of our democratic institutions lies in responding to the challenges of our time and the hopes and aspirations of our people.
They have to usher in the change and achieve the progress that we desire in our two countries.
A key factor that can contribute to its achievement is Good Governance.
Nations are according this goal more importance than ever before because of its inseparable link to social welfare and public good.
Absence of good governance has been identified as the root cause of many of the serious deficiencies in societies.
It robs the citizenry of their security, and of their social and economic rights, ironically established for their welfare and collective good.
Good governance is critically dependent on the existence of some fundamental pre-requisites.
At the core is the inviolable adherence to rule of law and delivery of justice.
From these principles would emanate the existence of participatory decision-making structure, transparency, responsiveness, accountability, equity and inclusiveness.
This would particularly imply the existence of a corruption free society and the presence of adequate avenues especially for the marginalised sections to have a definitive role in decision-making.
In brief, good governance means the existence of an elaborate architecture that has the good of the people as their only foci.
I believe good governance ought to be the essential, the most basic philosophy with the rule of law and justice being the most important tenets of good governance.
We are aware that political leaders from both countries have an abiding mutual admiration and empathy as well as respect for Mahatma Gandhi.
His philosophy of tolerance and self-restraint had a big impact on how India has administered itself over the past six and half decades with democratic governance.
The value system propounded as part of his philosophy included sincerity of effort, honesty of purpose and sacrifice for the larger good.
As I look around the world as someone who has lived on this planet for close to eight decades and as a Gandhian, I ask myself whether the ideals of patriotism, compassion, tolerance, self-restraint, honesty, discipline and respect for women are prevalent to the extent that they should be.
I have endeavoured in my private and public life to contribute to these very ideals, which I believe, are the very essence of being human.
We have become a trillion dollar economy, the largest in Southeast Asia.
We also have the largest middle class in the region.
The last decade has seen India emerge as one of the fastest growing nations in the world.
During this period, our economy grew annually at an average rate of 7.9 per cent.
We are self-sufficient in food grains production, the largest exporter of rice and the second largest exporter of wheat.
However, achieving equitable economic growth is still a challenge.
So also is the complete elimination of poverty, although a declining trend in the poverty rate is clearly visible.
Rapid creation of employment opportunities is an essential aspect of good governance.
It is the approximately 350 million middle-class Indian citizens that have put India on the world map over the past two decades or so.
In my Address to the Indian nation on the eve of 15th August, which marked the 66thAnniversary of our Independence, I referred to the need to provide our citizens entitlements backed by legal guarantees in terms of right to employment, education, food and information.
We also need to ensure that these entitlements lead to real empowerment of the people.
It will be essential to develop and sustain robust delivery mechanisms to make these legislations work.
Our trajectory of high level growth will need to be sustained.
Our continued success will need to be earned.
In spite of our achievements during these transformational decades, there remains much work to be done.
We will have to also strengthen the rule of law and good governance practices.
We will have to ensure harmonious relations among our diverse ethnic and religious groups which, in a secular polity, is of supreme importance for nation building.
We have learnt the difficult way that unless there is peace at our borders, development, and harmony cannot be achieved.
India and Turkey live in extremely difficult geographies, and both of us are aware of the grave challenges to our security, internal as well as external.
We continue to sustain moderation, pluralism and tolerance in our society.
It will be an India that is economically prosperous at all levels of society.
In 1947, with an India coming into being after two centuries of colonial rule, many would have thought this vision as being far-fetched, but as envisioned by our national leaders, I am proud to say that today, this is a future well within our reach.
Your Excellency Prime Minister Elio Di Rupo,
I thank you for your warm words of welcome.
It is indeed a pleasure to visit Brussels and to have the opportunity to interact with you.
I thank you for the overview of India-Belgium relations.
I deeply appreciate your gracious hospitality and the excellent arrangements made by your Government for the State visit.
Allow me to introduce the members of my delegation.
Excellency,
We appreciate your personal commitment to the relations between India and Belgium.
Our bilateral relations have acquired a degree of focus and purpose, in particular, in the recent years.
We appreciate your role and contribution.
I am confident that under your leadership and able guidance, India-Belgium relations will reach new heights.
There is a new dynamism in our relationship.
I am confident that both countries will devote full attention to taking the partnership forward in all the areas in which we are engaged.
We fondly recall your visit to India in 1998 as Minister for Economy and Foreign Trade, accompanying the then Crown Prince on an economic mission.
We highly value our friendly and very cordial relationship with Belgium, which is one of our closest partners in the European Union.
India-Belgium relations, based on our shared values and interests, such as the rule-of law, freedom of press, protection of human rights and independence of judiciary, have grown considerably in recent years.
Our two countries are open, multi-lingual and pluralistic societies.
These provide the basic foundation on which we can seek to build our relations.
High level visits between India and Belgium have provided the much needed impetus to strengthen our overall bilateral relations.
We have had the opportunity to receive His Majesty King Albert II in November 2008 and the then Crown Prince in March 2010.
Prime Minister of India, too, visited Brussels in December 2010 for a bilateral summit meeting.
These visits have successfully advanced our common agenda in a number of areas.
Within a short span of less than two years, after the formation of your Government, the Foreign Ministers of both our countries have exchanged visits.
A high level business delegation led by Princess Astrid is scheduled to visit India in November this year.
Cultural exchanges between India and Belgium have increased in the recent times.
We deeply appreciate the support extended by the Government of Belgium and by the Royal family for organization of Indian cultural festivals.
I am happy to jointly inaugurate Europalia.India festival with the King of Belgians.
This festival will be the largest Indian festival outside India.
These festivals greatly help to expand understanding and cooperation between our two countries and would be a catalyst for enhanced people-to-people contacts.
The last few years have seen a difficult economic environment in Europe and elsewhere.
Excellency, if I may elaborate,
However, this is much below the potential.
I am also happy to note that the Indian nationals engaged in diamond trade in Antwerp are contributing significantly to the Belgian economy.
The diamond sector is the largest component of our bilateral trade.
However, we need to continue our efforts to both increase and diversify our trade and investment relationship.
There is potential for diversification into areas such as life sciences, green technology, pharmaceuticals, infrastructure development and information and communication technology.
Belgium with its proven expertise in these fields can become an important partner.
Cooperation in these areas must be intensified in the coming years.
It is an excellent forum for exchange of views on various areas of bilateral economic cooperation, and we should strive to hold its meetings in regular periodicity.
It is also our hope that an early finalisation of the India-EU Broad-Based Trade and Investment Agreement will, in turn, give further impetus to bilateral trade and investment, which is all the more pertinent in the context of current global economic challenges.
We look forward to Belgium's support for bringing the negotiations to an early conclusion.
Excellency,
India and Belgium cooperate very closely in international institutions.
I would also like to acknowledge Belgium's upfront support for creating an exception for India in the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) to enable us to enter into international cooperation in the area of civilian nuclear energy.
A clear public stance by Belgium on this issue would be in line with our excellent cooperation.
Excellency,
Belgium has well-recognized expertise in certain areas of Science and Technology and we feel that there are immense possibilities for cooperation in these spheres.
Excellency,
Cooperation in education has to emerge as one of the important pillars of our partnership.
We should explore the possibilities of increasing academic exchanges between Belgian universities and renowned universities of India.
I am happy that some MoUs will be signed between India and Belgian Universities today.
We should encourage greater people-to-people contacts between our countries as it will facilitate business and cultural exchanges between our likeminded countries and deepen our relationship.
India views European Union as one of its principal partners with whom we have developed an intensive and multifaceted relationship.
We are having annual summits since 2000 and the relationship was elevated to the level of strategic partnership in 2004.
Before I conclude, let me reiterate that we attach high priority to our relationship with Belgium.
Our shared values make us natural partners.
We need to progress by taking concrete actions which bring direct benefits to our citizens.
This is the only way we can widen the base of our partnership and impart it greater sustainability.
It is in this light that we need to define our future interactions.
It is indeed a privilege for me to be present amidst you to inaugurate the Nineteenth Meeting of the Governing Council of the Centre on Integrated Rural Development for Asia and the Pacific (CIRDAP).
On behalf of my country, I extend a warm welcome to all the distinguished delegates who have come from here and those who have come from abroad to this beautiful historical city of Delhi.
India is one of its founder members.
As a pioneering regional body with a large network, this Centre has catalyzed mutual collaboration among the member countries.
These declarations have since become the guiding spirit for the Centre.
They underscore the need to address rural poverty in a holistic manner by mobilizing political, economic and social resources and by channeling the flow of national resources and international development assistance.
Hosting the nineteenth meeting of the Governing Council in India has given us an opportunity to reiterate this commitment.
I am hopeful of this Meeting resulting in rural development and poverty alleviation issues being seen in the perspective of the current changes and challenges facing the member countries.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Between 1990 and 2010, nearly one billion people in the world came out of poverty.
Studies indicate that two-thirds of poverty reduction is facilitated by growth while the remaining one-third is contributed by the degree of equality in the growth process.
The centrality of high economic growth for developing economies therefore needs no emphasis.
Despite Asia-Pacific being one of the fastest growing regions in the world, it is still beset with poverty and backwardness.
Sustainable development requires us to build capacity of the rural population, particularly the poor and marginalized.
Rural areas are important for any intervention in food security, education, skill development, employment, technology dissemination, health and nutrition, housing, drinking water and sanitation.
For all of us in the Asia-Pacific region and for many in the world, rural development and poverty alleviation have become synonymous with national development.
The digital divide between urban and rural areas has to be broken.
Technology-based solutions have to assist interventions in farming, healthcare and education.
Land, which is increasingly becoming a scarce resource, has to be managed efficiently.
Principles of community empowerment have to be adopted to increase the productivity of land, particularly rain-fed, degraded and waste lands.
Climate change, energy security and environmental degradation have to be given priority in development initiatives.
Judicious resource management has to be ensured even while putting people first.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
India is a proud repository of elected local self-governments - Panchayati Raj Institutions - at the district, sub-district and village levels.
There is approximately quarter of a million Panchayati Raj Institutions in India.
This is the single largest representative base in the world and the most prominent symbol of grassroots democracy.
As one-third seats are reserved for women, more than one million out of the 2.8 million representatives in these local bodies comprise women.
Most of the developmental and poverty alleviation programmes are implemented through these local bodies.
Good governance practices and women empowerment measures are required to make these bodies viable instruments of rural transformation.
The last decade has marked a paradigm shift in approach towards improving the quality of life in the rural areas.
Legislation and concrete programmes have sought to give focused attention on rural rejuvenation.
By enacting the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act in 2005, a landmark initiative has been taken to confer legal right for 100 days of employment in a year to every rural household demanding work.
The Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana has recognized the vital importance of road connectivity, especially in rural habitations, to development.
In 2011, an ambitious poverty reduction programme called the National Rural Livelihood Mission has been launched.
It intends to establish self-help groups as effective institutions of the rural poor to enable them to increase household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements, increased productive capacity, generation of durable assets, assimilation of new technologies in production and marketing, skill development and improved access to financial services.
Other welfare programmes have been started, aimed at providing social security net to vulnerable sections of society - the homeless, aged, widow and disabled.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is doubly critical that commitment of our global partners on overseas development assistance and capacity building remain firm.
It is a common goal of the developing countries, more so of the Asia-Pacific region, to make rural areas a significant contributing factor to national progress.
The Centre on Integrated Rural Development for Asia and the Pacific, which is active in promoting regional cooperation, has a big role to play.
A positive view should be taken about the expansion of this influential regional group to new frontiers.
I urge open exchange of views and experiences in this Governing Council meeting.
I am most certain of the conclusions and decisions taken here to help us prepare better for the challenges of tomorrow.
I wish all the delegates a pleasant and enjoyable stay in our midst.
I also wish the Centre all success.
It is indeed a privilege for me to be present on this happy occasion when we are launching the Khadi Mark.
At the outset, let me congratulate the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and the Khadi and Village Industries Commission for taking this key step to lend Khadi the unique identity it richly deserves.
This timely initiative will help to fully realize the growth potential of the Khadi sector.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It has the distinction of being the only cloth used in making our National Flag.
It conjures up feelings of national pride.
It is one of the most valued contributors of our national heritage.
Khadi has an admirable history behind it.
It is synonymous with our freedom struggle.
Both as a symbol of self reliance and a credible instrument for rejuvenation of the rural sector, Khadi instantly bring to our minds its profound association with Mahatma Gandhi, the father of this nation.
Bapu saw Khadi as a medium to arouse the masses towards nationalism and inspire them to live a life of dignity.
It remains an important vehicle for the development of rural India.
It is a way of life for many in our country.
There are at present around 10.45 lakh Khadi artisans of which seventy per cent are women.
For those who view khadi through the lenses of a hard-nosed small-scale business proposition, it has much to offer.
Khadi, owing to its hand spun, hand woven nature, is a fabric that breathes.
It is a natural textile that has gained prominence due to its eco-compatibility.
Khadi has the unique capability to create employment at the dwelling place of artisans with very low capital requirement.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It only needs a facilitatory environment to flourish.
I am happy that efforts have been made by the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises to revitalize this sector through a slew of schemes and programmes.
Recognizing the need to reform the Khadi sector, financial assistance from the Asian Development Bank has been mobilized under the Khadi Reform Development Programme.
The reform measures envisage professional marketing and introduction of the Khadi Mark.
It will indicate the quality and genuineness of a Khadi product.
It will provide a distinct identity for positioning and brand building in the domestic and international textile markets.
I am told that the Khadi Mark Regulation, 2013 has made it mandatory for institutions and persons involved in the production and sale of Khadi to use this Mark.
The logo of the Khadi Mark symbolises the purity and genuineness of Khadi.
I am confident that the Khadi Mark will prove to be truly beneficial to the customers in buying genuine Khadi and to the producers in improving their living standards.
I request all those involved in the production and sale of Khadi to value it and honour the regulation so that we can hold high the glory of Khadi.
I wish all of you success in your efforts.
Thank you.
It is my pleasure to be here today for the twenty third Convocation of the Pondicherry University and see the exuberance and excitement in the students who have come for this venerable occasion.
It is a beautiful city, which evokes instant appreciation for the grand mansions, beautiful boulevards and placid promenades.
It is the birthplace of the great Tamil poet, Bharathidasan.
Another illustrious Tamil poet, Subramania Bharathiar, chose this place to write some of his memorable poems.
Sri Aurobindo came here to establish a globally revered Ashram.
Friends:
While going through the profile of this University and the Report of the Vice-Chancellor, I could not help but admire the remarkable way in which this seat of higher learning has developed over the years.
In three campuses, fifteen schools, thirty seven departments and ten centres, over four hundred faculty members today teach over 6,100 students, courses in 175 post-graduate and research disciplines.
It also has 87 affiliated colleges that enroll over forty five thousand students.
It has truly emerged as an educational hub in the Southern region.
The state-of-the-art facilities in the University have paved the way for a student-friendly and result-oriented academic environment.
This University has pursued an education-led development in the region.
I am happy to note that it has adopted villages and initiated interactive programmes with local communities and bodies.
Friends:
It marks the culmination of a phase of learning.
I congratulate all the students who have received their degrees and diplomas today.
There will be times when you will find success easily and times when you will face adversity.
The trying moments will test your true mettle.
Your hard work, discipline, commitment and determination will help you navigate through the rough terrains.
Prepare well for meeting the life's challenges.
Do not leave any chance for regret.
As you now enter a stage where you can give back to the society, make your contribution and make it count.
India is an aspiring nation.
We can reach the zenith but it requires the sacrifices of all.
You are all capable and intelligent minds.
It is your duty to take our country forward.
Friends:
A university has to be a temple of learning; of humanism, tolerance and balanced reasoning.
Through the intellectual pursuits and knowledge sharing of scholars, academicians and scientists, it has to contribute to the progress of our society and the nation.
Education has to create responsible, innovative, analytical and compassionate citizens.
It has to respond positively to the change in society.
Every youth aims at becoming intellectually competent and technically skilled.
But knowledge generation without value formation counts for little.
Education without values is like a flower without fragrance.
Education has to impart values to the youth to make them sensitive to fellow human beings.
It has to be a process that completes an individual in all respects.
I know how satisfying it is for a teacher to give students the joy of learning; to make them appreciate, reflect and differentiate the strands of thinking; to make them worthy and willing to shoulder responsibility.
The faculty is the lifeblood of a university.
They must continuously renew their understanding of the subject.
They must be able to transfer knowledge to their students with dedication and commitment.
They must act as friend and guide to the students, ever willing to counsel and show them how best they can gear themselves to face the world.
I take a moment here to compliment the entire academic fraternity of the Pondicherry University for their selfless labour at preparing the students to face the test of life.
Friends:
If we are to grow as a nation, the education system has to figure prominently in the template of progress.
There is a dearth of quality academic institutions to prepare our next generation.
Indian universities are not counted amongst the top-ranked universities in the world.
If we peek into our past, we find our ancient education system dominating the world for about eighteen hundred years beginning Sixth Century BC.
Let me remind you that Takshashila, Nalanda, Vikramashila, Valabhi, Somapura and Odantapuri were the seats of world class universities.
Let us together bring the changes required to make our present higher education system shine brightly once again.
It is gratifying to note that during the Twelfth Plan period, we have focused on expansion, equity, excellence, governance, funding and monitoring.
These aspects have to be implemented in the right spirit for the higher education sector to see far-reaching changes.
The academic curriculum has to be updated regularly.
The assessment system has to be made more reliable and objective.
Friends:
It holds the key to future economic growth and social development.
Our universities have to create an environment supportive of innovation.
Teaching and research are the two eyes of a University.
While high standards in teaching have to be achieved, high quality research that will push knowledge frontiers and evolve technologies for development has to be promoted.
The quality of our research has to be comparable with the best in the world.
Our researchers have to cooperate with one another to find solutions to critical problems.
New products have to be designed that are useful to the common man.
Our innovations have to create livelihood and improve the quality of life in rural areas.
Local technological needs have to be addressed by our universities by creating research and development centres for such technologies in their campuses.
Research campuses also have to be set up in rural areas to act as fountain heads for innovation and technology-led growth in these regions.
Dear Students:
You have acquired capabilities here, which you must generously put to use in the nation-building process.
I wish you all a successful career and a purposeful life ahead.
May all your dreams come true.
If that is the glorious past, at present, Puducherry is a wonderful example of cultural assimilation.
Apart from its efforts to preserve elements of French culture, language and architecture amidst rapid growth, this city is home to people from almost every state of India and many foreign countries.
This has been possible to a large extent because of the Sri Aurobindo Ashram which stands as an example of national and international harmony.
This city also hosts an ever-growing number of visitors.
I say visitors instead of tourists because a great number of them come here with a purpose, more serious than simply enjoying a holiday.
They come in quest of both peace and knowledge from the spiritual ambience of the place.
This is the place where Sri Aurobindo visualised the future of man.
The first phase of the life of this great Master was devoted to the liberation of our Motherland from the British.
The second phase of his life was devoted to the liberation of humanity from its enslavement to ignorance.
He further recognized that liberation need not be an escape of the soul from this physical world.
Instead, it can be an active life free from all imperfections that affect us.
In his view, this world we live in is not a thing to be spurned but to be transformed through our collective aspiration.
There is a much brighter tomorrow awaiting the world.
Man will evolve into a new being; his ignorance will change into knowledge and his weaknesses will be metamorphosed into strength.
Among the sad maladies of our time are cynicism and despair.
They lead to insincerity in whatever work one does.
And insincerity is the mother of numerous other ills.
I hope those like you who are followers of Sri Aurobindo will contribute towards the materialisation of a better future through your attitude and your action.
I am happy to learn that the students of Sri Aurobindo international Centre of Education learn from a very small age a set of languages comprised of English, French and Sanskrit apart from your mother-tongues.
You succeed in learning even more languages such as Tamil, Hindi, Bengali, Odia, and Gujarati spontaneously because of your living, studying and playing together.
Further, some of you also choose to learn foreign languages such as German, Italian, Spanish, and Russian!
This is indeed a testimony to the international character of this institution and the Sri Aurobindo Ashram.
This liberality of approach and vision so unique to Sri Aurobindo and his Ashram stands as a symbol of hope for our conflict-ridden world and must be preserved and protected.
The youth of our country are not lagging behind any other in matters of intelligence or talent; but what our country needs is sincerity and dedication.
It is only a broad outlook, unhampered by regionalism, unencumbered by parochialism, unhindered by prejudices that can make this nation great and ideal enough to lead the world.
It is this role which Sri Aurobindo expected India to play during both the phases of his life.
If there is no dispute over this common goal, why should so much conflict, so much hatred and intolerance continue?
The real malady seems to lie at some deeper level.
Sri Aurobindo diagnoses it as an Evolutionary Crisis.
On one hand mankind is in command of colossal technological, scientific and other material powers, but on the other hand, he is not in full command of his own consciousness.
There are elements of inconscience deep within him which distort and even pervert all his fine intentions.
However, Sri Aurobindo also assures us that the solution to the crisis remains hidden in the crisis itself.
We must be increasingly mindful of the sensitivities of those around us and how they may be affected by our words and deeds.
While we endeavour to eliminate the problems that distort our social development, and as we address imbalances, we must collectively identify the values that have over the centuries, served to safeguard the pluralistic and secular fabric of our society.
And we must reinforce these ethics so that as we go forth into a globalised world, we as Indians remain faithful to these unique traditions.
Similarly, we must strive to continuously generate greater tolerance and understanding among all sections of our democratic society.
Every individual should have an aim.
But not to forget that the quality of your aim will depend the quality of your life.
My best wishes are with you.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
It gives me immense pleasure to be amongst you on the occasion of the celebrations of the Centenary of Indian Cinema, being organized jointly by the Government of Tamil Nadu and the South Indian Film Chamber of Commerce (SIFC).
Since then, the march of Indian cinema has been so impressive that today our film industry is vibrant and flourishing in different regions and languages.
Indian Cinema has now become a global enterprise.
Rapidly improving technology has helped the industry upgrade itself as also to radically alter the manner in which it reaches the audience.
Indian film making industry is one of the largest in the world and Indian Cinema has found market in a large number of countries.
Increasingly our filmmakers are also being recognized in many International Film Festivals.
Over the years, the Indian Film Industry has adopted latest technologies.
Indian film industry has already taken to the medium of digital cinema.
Facilities for film production as well as post production in the country have vastly improved and some are truly of world standard.
Several famous international production houses have evinced keen interest in our film industry and many Indian film enterprises are now participating in production and distribution of films around the world.
Needless to say, music of Indian Cinema has also been enthralling millions within India and overseas.
The southern film industry has played a major role in the development of Indian film industry.
Every year National Film Awards are conferred under different categories on Indian films for their aesthetic and technical excellence.
The Government has taken a number of steps to support the film industry, for example, by recognizing the best talent through awards, by showcasing some of the best Indian films in film festivals in India and abroad and also contributing to the nurturing of skilled human resources.
With new methods of story telling and different formats of reaching cinema to all corners of India, there is also increasing realization on the need to preserve our cinematic heritage for the benefit of future generations.
The Government of India, with active support of the film industry, is engaged in efforts to restore, preserve and digitize our film legacy.
The Film & Television Institute of India, Pune and Satyajit Ray Film & Television Institute, Kolkata are two of our premier institutions that impart education in the field of film and television.
They have given to the film industry some of its best talent.
A number of acclaimed members of the Indian film industry are from these Institutes.
Cinema is a popular and powerful medium of communication.
The number of cine goers in country is very large.
It is therefore essential to strike a balance between entertainment and social responsibility of this medium.
The recent incidents of crime against women and children have shaken the conscience of the nation.
We have also been witness to tragic communal riots in some parts of our country recently.
We must find ways to reverse the erosion of our values.
In this context, I would like to stress upon the crucial role the Cinema can and must play in resetting the moral compass of the nation.
It is the responsibility of everyone associated with the film industry to use the powerful medium of cinema to portray our positive societal values for building a tolerant and harmonious India.
I call upon the entertainment industry to be mindful and sensitive to this responsibility and take all steps to create cinema that contributes to social transformation and moral upliftment.
Thank you.
I consider it my good fortune to be here today to inaugurate the new hospital building of Jagadguru Sri Shiva-rathreeshwara (JSS) Maha-vidya-peetha.
The JSS Maha-vidya-peetha was set up in 1954 by Dr. Sri Shivarathri Rajendra Mahaswamiji of the Jagadguru Veera Simhasana Peetha of Suttur, a revered one thousand-year old peetha.
It is only a few organizations that have put this thinking into practice.
The JSS Maha-vidya-peetha and the Suttur Math are notable examples.
They have established high traditions of selfless service to humanity.
They have constantly fought for the attainment of social rights.
They have taken several noteworthy initiatives in education, healthcare, shelter, food, skill training, rural development and social reforms.
I congratulate the JSS Maha-vidya-peetha for opening this new hospital building aimed at providing affordable and quality healthcare in the region.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Even before primary health centers were conceived in the country, this State had established a number of primary healthcare units, and a delivery system comprising curative, preventive and rehabilitation healthcare.
These efforts have enhanced the health status, increased productivity, and raised living standards of the citizens in this State.
Philanthropic causes like JSS Maha-vidya-peetha have also contributed in a large measure to this success.
It is a valuable asset irrespective of the strata one belongs to.
A healthy population holds greater capacity to access opportunities for education, knowledge and employment.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
In 2005, the National Rural Health Mission was started to take healthcare to the doorstep of the rural population through a network of sub-centres, primary health centres and community health centres.
Better infrastructure, trained manpower and effective drugs and modern equipments under this Mission have resulted in improved service delivery.
A new National Health Mission, combining rural and urban areas, has commenced this year.
Greater intervention is required to give the people a world class healthcare system.
The public sector health service in India is still limited by its reach.
Quality of healthcare delivery is also found wanting.
Many people depend on the private sector for health services.
They often fail to shoulder the burden of expensive medical treatment and plunge into poverty.
People require the means to access specialty medical treatment and not stand denied due to high costs.
It is heartening to note that the telemedicine project, using satellite technology, has connected remote health centres with super specialty hospitals in urban areas.
This has helped expert healthcare consultation to reach the needy and under-served people.
Other innovative uses of technology have to be explored.
Effective and inexpensive cure for many diseases has to be found.
Sophisticated equipments for medical procedures that are presently imported have to be manufactured indigenously.
Research centres and medical colleges have to be encouraged for innovations.
To have a large pool of high-calibre doctors in our country, medical education has to be strengthened.
Our doctors have to be provided exposure to latest advances in their fields of specialization.
Our health coverage strategy has to look beyond medical cure and intervention.
Preventive healthcare has to assume importance due to the increasing trend of lifestyle diseases.
Our health system has to gear itself to treat people and also provide guidance about prevention of medical conditions.
For that, disease prevention, early detection and treatment have to be encouraged.
A healthy living has to be fostered.
Balanced diet, physical activity, lifestyle management and environment care have to be promoted to achieve well-being of mind and body.
For ushering in healthy behaviour and practices, efforts have to be directed at change, in both individuals and communities.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Public expenditure on health in India is 1.2 per cent of GDP.
This is much lower than the 4 per cent plus levels in countries like US, UK, Australia, Norway and Brazil.
The right question is to ask whether India can afford not to invest in ensuring these basic constituents of living.
The answer is no if we want peace, stability and prosperity.
As public resources have several pressing uses, private healthcare providers have to be encouraged and suitably engaged to provide quality healthcare services.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Medical institutions like yours have a pivotal role to guide our health sector.
You have a duty to build in the minds of the young doctors and health professionals a strong sense of patriotism and social responsibility.
There are doctors who want to undergo higher studies in premier institutions abroad to acquire greater expertise and widen their horizon.
They deserve encouragement.
At the same time, they have to remember that the nation has invested in their education.
Wherever they go, they have to retain the sacred bond with their motherland.
Doctors have to remember always the true meaning of the Hippocratic Oath that they took on entering this noble profession.
I am most certain that a virtuous organization like the JSS Maha-vidya-peetha would continue to infuse the notions of ethical behaviour in their doctors and students.
I once again congratulate the Suttur Math and JSS Maha-vidya-peetha for their selfless efforts.
I wish them all success.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
The National Communal Harmony Awards conferred on them today are a recognition of their outstanding efforts in promoting communal harmony in our country and in strengthening national integration within its diverse peoples.
No religion preaches discord.
On the contrary, they prescribe that it is the moral duty of every individual and of society as a whole, to spread peace and amity.
These principles are at the very foundation of our secular fabric.
And, although maintenance of social peace and harmony is a function of Government, this responsibility cannot be delinked from the duties of each and every individual citizen.
We should strive to complement their achievements with our own individual and collective efforts.
Each one of us must think of our own personal contribution to peace, harmony, amity and accord in our respective spheres of activities.
It coalesces and synthesizes the currents of vibrant cultures, religions and civilizations.
It is, therefore, important to recognize and salute those among us who promote these methods and fight with courage against the forces of obscurantism, extremism and militarism.
Gandhiji firmly believed that the key to the solution of the communal tangle lies in everyone following the best in his own religion and entertaining equal regard for the other religions and their followers.
To them I say, God be with you.
I am happy to be here to inaugurate this Engineers Conclave 2013 being held for the first time in our country.
It gives me pleasure to be amongst top Engineers and Technologists from all over the country who have gathered to share their innovative ideas and research and development work in diversified areas of engineering and technology.
It is befitting that the present Conclave is being jointly organized by the Indian National Academy Engineering (INAE), the top Engineering Academy of the country and our leading research organization, the Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO).
Engineers play a very important role in every walk of life.
They convert knowledge of basic sciences into products.
They are versatile minds who build bridges between sciences, technology and society.
They help improve living conditions for the common people.
By virtue of our achievements in multiple fields, India stands poised to emerge as a leading nation in the 21st century.
The innovation capability of our scientists and engineers will play a critical role in enabling India achieve this goal.
This conclave is happening at a time when the world is beginning to emerge from the global economic crisis.
I believe the underlying growth impetus remains strong due to continued rise in per capita incomes, expanding middle-class consumers and a young and energetic workforce.
Of course, stronger efforts from all stakeholders can build on this trend, and enable us secure faster growth as the global economy revives.
The substantial growth rate that our country has achieved over the last few years is second only to China in the world.
A growth rate of 9 per cent per year has been envisaged during the Twelfth Five Year Plan period of 2012 to 2017.
Such scales of economic expansion need several enabling factors prominent among them being education.
We have, over time, created an infrastructure of good educational institutions for imparting quality education at all levels.
In the higher education sector, India is endowed with 659 degree awarding institutions and 33,023 colleges.
The number of Indian Institutes of Technology has increased from 7 in 2006-07 to 15 in 2011-12.
The number of National Institutes of Technology (NITs) has increased from 20 in 2006-07 to 30 in 2011-12.
The enrolment to higher education institutions in the country has similarly increased, from 1.39 crores in 2006-07 to 2.18 crores in 2011-12.
Engineering comprised 13 per cent of the total enrolment in 2006-07.
This figure has since increased to 25 per cent.
The growth rate of enrolment in Engineering, which was close to 25 per cent annually during the Eleventh Plan period, is the highest for any field of individual study.
Several steps have been taken to bring about an improvement in the quality of technical education, particularly engineering.
Virtual labs developed for science and engineering are being rolled out.
The Government, with the support of the World Bank, has been conducting a three-phase programme for technical education quality improvement.
While the first phase from 2002 to 2009 covered 127 engineering institutions, the second phase from 2010 to 2014 would cover about 190 more engineering institutions.
Our thrust on infrastructure development and industrial production provide further fillip to the sector, creating high demand for products across the engineering spectrum from machinery and automotives to power equipment, electronics, and advanced manufacturing.
Special initiatives have been taken to support key sub-sectors, with policies dedicated to automotives, electronics, chemicals and petrochemicals, and heavy machinery, among others.
Clusters and growth corridors across the country facilitate competitiveness as centers such as Pune, Chennai and Bengaluru have attained global acclaim for their high quality products.
India enjoys strong competencies in engineering, with advantages in design, new product development and time-to-market capacities.
As services input for manufacturing industries expand, India with its capabilities in services sector can play a bigger role in knowledge inputs for the engineering industry.
A large number of global firms are already taking advantage of these benefits by establishing their research and development centers in India.
The National Manufacturing Policy, 2011 has envisaged the creation of 100 million additional jobs in the manufacturing sector by 2025.
It is expected that share of manufacturing in GDP will increase to 25 per cent by 2022.
To make Indian Industry productive and competitive, we must enhance our capabilities on many fronts, primarily human skill, hardware technology, and knowledge base.
I strongly believe that there is another milestone to be crossed in the quality and productivity journey.
New operating models would need to be considered such as flexible automation, multi-location production, deferred customization and disposable factories.
People should be at the heart of the engineering effort, reaching out to human resources, consumers and vendors.
The contribution of manufacturing to total employment in India is about 11 per cent, which is lower than that of many emerging countries where the share of manufacturing in total employment is between 15 to 30 per cent.
Innovation is a key managerial strategy for growth.
We must lay emphasis on its various dimensions such as process innovation, product innovation, business model innovation and new technology innovation.
Strong capabilities in designing and building machine tools are particularly critical.
Industry must also develop close partnerships with universities and research institutions to take this aspiration forward.
A sustainable development model is not only an imperative today but is also opening new opportunities for the industrial sector.
Indian Industry should focus on reducing carbon footprint and devising green technologies.
Solar energy and other renewable energy markets are expected to grow strongly.
Opportunities in green products such as green buildings, bio fuels, and green technologies such as nanotechnology and artificial intelligence should be explored.
In our country, a large population lives in villages and there is need for specific technology innovation for rural areas.
One innovation that made a difference about three decades back was replacement of wooden wheel by rubber tyres in a bullock carts.
It happened almost overnight from south to north and east to west and no one knows who championed it.
It was technology simple to implement and helped increasing cart capacity many fold.
Our country needs hundreds of such innovations that are simple and sustainable in a rural context.
Rather than agriculture tools designed in the west, we need tools that are simple, repairable by local technicians and usable without electricity.
If you ask a common man today, what is the role of engineers in your life; he may say a bicycle or mobile phone or an electronic gadget.
You ask him further what role Indian engineers have in your life; he may get confused and search of an answer.
I wish you very fruitful discussions and look forward to the transformation into practical reality of the ideas being germinated here.
Arise to the challenges of the day and dedicate yourself to the building of strong India.
The prize, instituted in the name of our former Prime Minister Late Shrimati Indira Gandhi, celebrates the values that Mrs. Gandhi stood and fought for in the service of our nation and people.
Mrs. Gandhi played a major role in defining the destiny of India.
She was unflinching in her concern for the poor and the disadvantaged and she championed their cause with rare intensity.
She was also a crusader for global peace, a just economic order and disarmament.
It is therefore befitting that the Indira Gandhi Peace Prize honours those who have made significant contribution to peace, disarmament and development, causes that were so dear to Indiraji.
After decades of fighting for freedom, justice and equality in Liberia, Madam President you have revived national hope by strengthening institutions of good governance and leading the revitalization of the national economy.
Your activism brought you imprisonment and exile, but neither deterred you from speaking out in the interest of peace, justice and equality.
As the first woman elected to lead an African nation, President Sirleaf is an inspiration to women everywhere, indeed to all of us who seek and work for building peaceful and prosperous communities that enable the development of an informed empowered and productive citizenry.
Her outstanding leadership and remarkable vision has earned her international recognition, including the prestigious Nobel Peace Prize.
President Sirleaf has been a powerful voice for conflict resolution, harmony, peace and democracy in Africa.
Peace and development are the two concepts closely intertwined and necessary to break the vicious cycle of poverty, hunger, inequality, violence and war.
India has been privileged to have played a key role in peace keeping efforts in Liberia.
India was the first country to send an all female police unit to a peace-keeping mission with its deployment in Liberia.
I recall, Madam President, that during a visit to this all Female Indian Unit in 2011, you announced that due to the inspiration drawn from them, your Government has targeted twenty percent woman recruitment in your security forces.
There is a long history of civilisational contacts, friendship and cooperation between India and Africa.
Human resource development and capacity building assistance are at the core of Indian cooperation with Africa because they enable and empower people to take charge of their own future.
The India-Africa Forum Summit provides a new template for our partnership.
This partnership is guided by the vision and priorities of our African partners and is anchored in the fundamental principles of equality, mutual respect and mutual benefit.
India will continue to assist Africa in charting its own course through institution building, infrastructure development and technical and vocational skill development.
Our development cooperation partnership with Liberia parallels your own priorities.
Today, especially when the global economic environment is in turmoil, the importance of South-South cooperation takes on a particular salience.
As aspiring economies, India and Africa share a lot in common.
This provides a natural synergy for building partnerships.
We visualise a partnership that is anchored in the fundamental principles of equality, mutual respect and mutual benefit.
India and Liberia have a longstanding relationship of friendship and cooperation.
We stand with President Sirleaf in her efforts to pursue stability, economic growth and democratic governance for the Liberian people.
It is with great pleasure that I welcome Your Excellency, President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf and your distinguished delegation on your first State visit to India.
You have toiled relentlessly to spread education, change attitudes and establish a new social order.
Your Government has introduced and implemented wide-ranging reforms.
You have made it a priority to foster gender equality and empower the women of Liberia with the right of equal participation in the decision making processes.
Your steadfast determination and inspiring leadership has helped Liberia become a land of opportunity.
We have together evolved and shaped our long standing ties of friendship and co-operation into a very comprehensive partnership.
Today, we have moved beyond trade and investment to technology transfers, knowledge sharing and skills.
The India-Africa partnership has been reinvigorated and is steadily acquiring new dimensions as we take it forward under the India-Africa Forum Summit process.
Excellency, we see the Africa of today as a continent that is illuminated by the freedom, optimism and confidence that its people have in the power of their own potential.
Guided by the wisdom of their ancestors, enthused by the vigour of their young generations, sustained by their rich diversity and natural resources and inspired by the vast horizons opening up to them, there is no limit to what Africans can achieve in terms of progress and prosperity.
The continent is today at a thresh-hold, embarking on a path of sustained growth and poised to play a defining role on the world stage.
Our development partnership with Liberia will respond to your requirements as you choose your priorities and options - and forge your independent path of advancement and growth.
We remain committed to our work with Liberia and to leverage our strengths to assist in whatever way we can.
Excellency, you will receive the Indira Gandhi Award for Peace, Disarmament and Development for the Year 2012 tomorrow.
This award is an apt recognition of your exceptional dedication towards your country and your fellow citizens.
Your remarkable vision and leadership, grounded in the principles of good governance and accountability will, no doubt, generate and sustain transformative economic growth and development in Liberia.
We wish you a very comfortable stay in Delhi.
I look forward to our work together in the coming years.
- To the health, happiness and well being of Her Excellency President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf.
- To the well being and prosperity of the people of Liberia
- To lasting friendship between India and Liberia.
It gives me immense pleasure to extend a very warm welcome to you all to the Inaugural Session of the 31st Meeting of Ministers of Health and 66th Session of the WHO Regional Committee for South-East Asia.
I hope that your stay in the historic city of Delhi would be comfortable and will provide you the necessary zeal, energy and enthusiasm for successful deliberations during the meetings.
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
This international platform at the regional level is crucial for this region since it houses 1.79 billion people, which is 26.4 percent of the global population.
The data also reveals that South East Asia Region has more than 27% of global disease burden due to Non-Communicable Diseases which indicates the increasing prevalence of Non-Communicable Diseases in the region.
It is also a matter of concern that South East Asia region registers the lowest total expenditure on health as a percentage of gross domestic product (3.8%) and per capita total expenditure on health as per World Health Statistics 2009, with 84.4% out of pocket expenditure.
In this background, I am sure that the meeting of the Health Ministers of the region followed by the session of the WHO Regional Committee for South-East Asia would map the way forward for the entire Region, and would throw up broad agreements and the desired joint commitment on important initiatives and strategies.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is an urgent necessity to build a conducive environment to ensure the highest quality of health for the people of the Region.
However, this needs a multi-dimensional approach on part of the respective Governments.
I am happy to note that the agenda for these two events include most of the health issues in the Region warranting serious discussion and immediate interventions thereupon.
It is a matter of some satisfaction that due to the ongoing systematic efforts of the countries in the region as well as the WHO support, several of them are on track to reach the majority of health related Millennium Development Goals.
These efforts have led to some remarkable achievements like the eradication of polio, eradication of smallpox, improvement in life-expectancy and reduction in infant and maternal mortality rates.
However, the situation is not uniform in all countries of the region.
Some countries are still lagging far behind and would require much more efforts as well as resources to achieve the health related Millennium Development Goals.
An estimated 142 million people, or 8% of the population of the WHO South-East Asia Region, are above the age of 60 years.
This number will continue to increase and by 2025 the estimated proportion of the population over 60 years will be twice that of 2000, and by 2050 will have further increased to three times the proportion of 2000.
The Yogyakarta Declaration on Ageing and Health 2012 rightly affirms that elderly people are a precious social asset and serious efforts should be made by the Member States and partners in the South-East Asia Region to adopt a holistic and multidisciplinary approach to promote healthy ageing in the Member States.
All the stakeholders in the Region should advocate jointly and follow up effectively on all aspects of the Yogyakarta Declaration.
The unabated rise in the prevalence of hypertension among the population in the Region also cannot be ignored.
It is all the more alarming that the incidence of Hypertension is especially increasing among the youth.
The stressful modern lifestyle further aggravates the situation.
We know that hypertension has serious health implications, especially in the long run.
Thus, necessary cost-effective, timely interventions need to be explored by countries in the Region to check this undesirable trend.
As the 2015 target date for achieving the Millennium Development Goals approaches, there is wide debate as to what development goals the global community should set next.
The United Nations has already appointed a High-level Panel to advise on the global development agenda beyond 2015.
Thus, this may be the ideal time for the Ministers of Health of the Region to debate on this imperative issue, keeping region-specific preferences in context.
An ideal healthcare delivery system should be accessible to all in the Region.
Considering the current lack of access to quality healthcare at an affordable cost for the majority of the population in the Region, the proposed universal health coverage seems to be a very plausible solution.
However, evidence indicates that two areas cause significant inequities and inefficiencies in health in the Region: first, direct out-of-pocket payments for access to care that can push households into poverty; and, second, a significant proportion of these payments go towards the purchase of medicines.
Strategic investments in medical education and training would be needed to enhance the availability of scientifically credible professionals for all communities.
The existing inefficiencies in the supply chain and logistics management of drugs and vaccines should also be addressed on a priority basis.
Noncommunicable diseases are the leading cause of mortality globally and in the Region.
Each year around 7.9 million people die due to noncommunicable diseases accounting for 55% of all deaths in the Region.
It seems appropriate that besides adopting the nine global voluntary targets, a detailed Regional Action Plan is drawn and strictly adhered to in order to control this epidemic.
This legally-binding agreement significantly contributes to global public health security by providing a new framework for the coordination of the management of events that may constitute a public health emergency of international concern, and will improve the capacity of all countries to detect, assess, notify and respond to public health threats.
It is important for all the countries in the Region to discuss the developments in this regard and to ensure that they meet the IHR core surveillance and response requirements.
In the end, I sincerely hope that these sessions would contribute significantly towards an improved healthcare environment in the Region.
Before I conclude, let me again wish you a memorable and enjoyable stay in New Delhi and successful deliberations.
Ladies & Gentlemen,
With these words, I hereby declare the Thirty-first Meeting of the Ministers of Health and the Sixty-sixth Session of the WHO Regional Committee for South-East Asia officially open.
Thank You for your attention.
I am indeed delighted to meet you today to participate in this award ceremony.
The recognition of the highest achievers amongst you has encouraged and inspired generations of Scouts and Guides to channelise their energies vigorously into community service and nation building.
I am happy to see that your strength has reached a record 51 lakhs.
You represent a highly motivated and well-organized body of dedicated youth.
You have proven to be a very efficient voluntary movement, non-political in nature, that has purposefully engaged in the building of an enlightened and progressive society.
It will impel you to spread the virtues of mutual respect and brotherhood in our society.
Through your participation in the Scouts and Guides Movement, you will also realise your own intellectual, physical and spiritual potential.
We are, today, only too aware of the social conflicts that can threaten our rapidly transforming society.
Our nation is presently transiting through an unprecedented demographic change.
In 2020, the average Indian will be only 29 years old.
This should indicate how important it is for us to focus, today, on our youth.
While we speak of inclusive growth, it is the leaders at the grassroots who will be the agents of change.
I am confident that the Scouts and Guides Movement can effectively provide this leadership where it is needed - at the bottom of the pyramid.
This simple campaign teaches you dignity of labour, an important value that Gandhiji strongly upheld.
Inculcating this at a young age will enthuse you with self confidence, self reliance and a sense of duty.
Community activities to protect, conserve and preserve our abundant natural resources and our environment are, in my estimation a national duty.
Creating greater awareness of this duty, and the manner in which each and every member of our society can fulfil this important obligation is an area where your cadres can make a big difference.
While we endeavour to eliminate the problems that distort our social development, and as we address imbalances, we must collectively identify the values that have, over the centuries, served to safeguard the pluralistic and secular fabric of our society.
And we must reinforce these ethics so that as we go forth into a globalised world, we, as Indians, remain faithful to these unique traditions.
Similarly, we must strive to continuously generate greater tolerance and understanding among all sections of our democratic society.
Your initiatives can help in the building of national pride among young people and teach them to recognize and reject any narrow and divisive agendas.
In this context, especially, the Scouts, Guides, Rovers and Rangers are fortunate that they have the guidance of Adult Leaders.
You have been at the forefront in extremely challenging situations.
Your support to the railways and civil administration during the Kumbh Mela, your programmes of rebuilding schools, Polio Immunization, Anti Tobacco Campaign, Education extension and Community Workshops are only a few of the numerous projects that you have so successfully carried out.
I thank each and every member of the Bharat Scouts and Guides Movement for your selfless service to the nation.
I am sure that with every initiative that you take up, you inspire many to also come forward and make a contribution with similar dedication and sincerity.
I offer the Bharat Scouts and Guides my felicitations and extend to you my good wishes for the continued success of your endeavours.
It is an honour for me to be present here today for the International Literacy Day, 2013.
I compliment the National Literacy Mission Authority for organizing the celebrations marking this important occasion.
It is indeed a proud moment for us that India has won the prestigious UNESCO King Sejong Literacy Prize this year.
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the National Literacy Mission Authority, State Literacy Mission Authorities and all other literacy functionaries for their dedication and untiring efforts.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Its positivity runs deep.
It is a tool for daily life in modern society.
It is a bulwark against poverty, and a building block of development, an essential complement to investments in roads, dams, clinics and factories.
It is a cornerstone for all categories of education, including life-long learning.
It plays a key role in sustainable development resulting in peace and harmony.
Most conflicts in our country, and outside, has its roots in the manipulation of ignorant minds and the distortion of information.
It is easy to induce illiterate or uninformed individuals and build misperception in their minds.
They are susceptible to mental conditioning.
The propensity for conflict is higher as they can be influenced easily.
On the other hand, a literate mind contributes to processes aimed at peace and development.
The individual capacity to think increases through the knowledge of letters.
Higher level of literacy leads to greater awareness.
It can help people acquire new skills leading to prosperity and development.
A literate society has a better quality of life, particularly life expectancy, infant mortality, learning levels and nutritional levels of children.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is an occasion to create greater public awareness about this social ill and to mobilize public opinion in favour of the continuing struggle against illiteracy.
It also serves to renew our commitment towards its eradication.
It is gratifying to note the steady progress made in literacy levels in our country after Independence.
The literacy rate has increased by four times from eighteen per cent in 1951 to seventy four per cent in 2011.
Despite this, our literacy rate is below the world average of eighty four per cent.
The reasons are not very hard to decipher.
A huge accumulated backlog of non-literates makes the task of achieving a significant rise in literacy rate harder.
It has been envisaged that by the end of the Twelfth Five Year Plan period, we would achieve eighty per cent literacy rate and also narrow the gender gap from sixteen to ten percentage points.
Our ultimate objective should be to bring the literacy rate not only at par with the world average but the levels attained by the leading nations.
The existing gender disparity in literacy levels has to be bridged by turning our attention on girl child and women.
Our attempts at achieving wide-spread literacy should be complemented by efforts at alleviating poverty, mitigating inequity owing to gender and social category, and improving access to schooling.
The implementation structure has to be strengthened by involving government agencies as well as reputed organizations in the non-government and private sectors.
With the active participation and commitment of all stakeholders particularly literacy functionaries, I am confident that we will achieve these targets.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This had underscored the need to embark upon a tangible plan.
Recognizing this imperative, the Government had launched the Saakshar Bharat program on this very day, four years ago.
This Initiative was aimed at establishing a fully literate society through improved standards of Adult Education and Literacy.
70 million adults in the age group of 15 years and above were the primary target for imparting functional literacy under this programme.
I am told that more than 20 million learners have already been certified as literate.
Instead of functioning as a transient agent, this Mission has to take the shape of a regular and permanent mechanism.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Through meaningful advocacy, we have to create, amongst those who are unable to read and write an inner urge to become literate.
The success of our literacy programme ultimately depends on the willingness and cooperation of the people.
I call upon each and every citizen of our country to take up this challenge and contribute in making our country free from the clutches of illiteracy.
With this, I extend my gratitude to the distinguished delegates for participating in this function.
I wish you all the very best.
It has spiritedly overcome the hurdles that are associated with a nascent academic institution.
It has expanded its academic programme, undeterred by paucity of physical infrastructure.
From 94 students in three under-graduate programmes when it started five years ago, it today has more than 750 students engaged in 14 programmes.
It emphasizes the need for students to learn from a wider knowledge spectrum and acquire inter-disciplinary capabilities.
To formulate academic and research framework for issues of local priority, it opened two Schools in 2011, namely Earth, Ocean and Climate Sciences, and Minerals, Metallurgical and Materials Engineering.
Friends:
This is possible only if we have highly capable engineers, scientists, doctors, academicians and other intellectuals.
A strong academic foundation is the basis for producing such talented and trained people.
Our efforts at expanding higher education infrastructure in India have yielded positive results.
Even then, on account of lack of quality, very few academic institutions can claim global reckoning.
As per an international ranking, there is not a single Indian university, including the IITs, amongst the top two hundred universities in the world.
Leading universities of the West and universities even in countries like China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Brazil, Mexico, South Africa, Malaysia and Saudi Arabia are ranked higher than any Indian institution.
In the past, for about eighteen hundred years beginning Sixth Century BC, we had an unbeatable higher education system represented by universities like Takshashila, Nalanda, Vikramashila, Valabhi, Somapura and Odantapuri.
They were a magnet for knowledge seekers from distant places.
But today, we languish behind many nations.
Improvement in our academic system calls for innovative changes.
Our examination system must incorporate modern methods of evaluation.
Top quality teachers must be recruited.
A spirit of competition amongst universities must be infused.
Academic regulation must be streamlined to create a more flexible, transparent and student friendly educational system.
Friends:
Progress is today technology-led.
In India, research and innovation does not adequately portray the inherent ingenuity of the people.
A Science, Technology and Innovation Policy was adopted this year to push innovation frontiers by kindling the creative energy of our population.
The mantle to make this policy successful and unleash our inventiveness lies on our higher academic institutions.
I am happy that IIT Bhubaneswar has done exactly that.
129 students are today enrolled in its PhD programmes in the pursuit of cutting edge research in various fields.
This Institute has tie ups with reputed national research and development organizations.
It has also bagged thirteen industrial consultancy projects.
It has initiated measures to nurture innovation and creativity in its students, scholars and faculty members.
It has adopted a curriculum this year, which encourages and supports research across all under-graduate and post-graduate programmes.
To foster creativity, it has instituted an award for the most innovative project carried out by the final year students of B.Tech programmes.
Scientific advances in the middle ages owe a great deal to the contribution of scientists like Copernicus, Galileo, Kepler and Newton.
Academic institutions must forge knowledge partnerships, both within and outside the country.
I am glad to learn that IIT Bhubaneswar has been proactive in seeking global academic cooperation.
It has initiated faculty exchange programmes with renowned universities in US, UK and Canada.
I am confident of this programme setting global benchmarks of engineering education in this young Institute.
Friends:
They have earned respect globally for their intellect and professionalism.
As a product of IIT, you have to live up to this expectation.
I am confident that each one of you will excel in your chosen field, and each one of you will lead a life of relative comfort.
They came to see a dream realized; a long cherished aspiration of the people of this State fulfilled.
It is time for you to help realize the hopes and aspirations of your compatriots.
You have surmounted all the difficult academic challenges.
You have competed with the best.
As you leave the portals of your alma mater today, remember that cooperation is equally important in life as competition.
In your professional life, solving tasks would require many minds to come together.
Learn to be a team player.
Develop tolerance for multiple viewpoints.
Be humble.
Respect and understand your colleagues.
I also wish the management and faculty of IIT Bhubaneswar greater success in their endeavours.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
This will be an occasion which the students will remember fondly for the rest of their lives.
It is also an important day for their family and friends as this achievement is one that is seldom managed without the support of the near and dear.
With a humble and modest beginning in 1938, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan is now more than 75 years old.
I had the honour and privilege of inaugurating its Platinum Jubilee celebrations at Mumbai on 12th December last year.
I am happy to know that it has been granting regular scholarships and stipends to poor students as well as imparting free computer education through the Gandhi Institute of Computer Training.
It is laudable that this Institute has emphasized not just academics but also personality development of students through the practice of yoga, sports, cultural activities and visits to foreign countries.
The founding of the Bhavan echoed his deeply entrenched belief in the instrument of education, which he was convinced, could offer wings for the growth and development of India.
We must however remain confident that we will be able to overcome these hurdles.
There may be areas of concern but there is absolutely no reason for despair or despondency.
The fundamentals of the Indian economy continue to be strong.
India has the necessary resources, talent and policies to effectively handle current difficulties.
From such depths we climbed, first, to 3% growth, and then took a quantum leap forward.
During this period, our economy grew annually at an average rate of 7.9 per cent.
We are today self-sufficient in food grains production.
Farmers in the selected clusters adopted good agricultural practices and benefitted from the yield advantage of hybrid rice technology.
Of the total rice production of 104 million tonnes in the country in 2011-12, a record production of 55 million tonnes of rice was contributed by the Eastern region.
India is today the largest exporter of rice and second largest exporter of wheat in the world.
The record production of 18.45 million tonnes of pulses this year augurs well for our march towards self-sufficiency in pulses.
This was unthinkable just a few years ago.
This momentum has to be sustained.
In a globalized world, with increasing economic complexities, we have to learn to cope better with adversities, both external and domestic.
Global factors have affected the currencies of many emerging economies including India.
Stabilizing the rupee is engaging the attention of our policy makers.
Number of steps has been taken to strengthen our external sector.
A good monsoon this year should have a favourable impact on agricultural growth and food prices.
Though growth has slowed down in recent times, the fundamentals of our economy remain strong.
Steps are being taken to contain the fiscal deficit and boost industrial investments.
Effective management and determined minds are critical in ensuring the rapid development of our nation.
Knowledge of the theory and application of business management imparted to you by the Institute tempered with real life experience will soon create successful managers out of you.
These principles should be inculcated into every sphere of management, as they are essential for effective and sustainable development.
Your primary goal should be to transform society and not salaries or profits.
Sometimes there will be setbacks in life.
Your own colleagues and friends may let you down.
But it is in such situations that the training provided to you by institutions like the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan will stand you in good stead.
You must face adverse situations with fortitude and be confident that in the end truth alone triumphs.
You must understand that considerable resource, effort and sacrifice have gone into your education.
Society has invested in you and society can legitimately demand a dividend from you.
You can pay this dividend by helping those who are weak, needy and deprived.
The destiny of our nation will be shaped by the will power, initiative and ingenuity of the youth.
• Be a good human being and a good citizen
• Be positive all the time in thought, action and deed.
• When obstacles come, stay calm and overcome them with perseverance and determination.
• Always dream because dreamers are creators
• Try to be always innovative and understand the infinite power of innovation and creativity which lies dormant inside you.
It gives me great pleasure to be here today to confer the Second Tagore Award for Cultural Harmony for the year, 2013, to Maestro Zubin Mehta.
I congratulate the eminent Jury for their unanimous choice.
He has made it his mission to bring hope and reason wherever there is conflict and discord.
To audiences across the world, Zubin Mehta has brought a message of optimism - and conviction about the shared destiny of humankind.
His name is synonymous with amity and faith.
He is a legend in the world of music and an emissary of goodwill between nations.
It is only appropriate that this award, instituted to promote the values of universal brotherhood, should be conferred upon him.
Rabindranath Tagore was an internationalist far ahead of his times.
A versatile genius, he was a beacon of the cultural renaissance of India in the 19th and early 20th century.
His writings on state and society, science and civilization, his musings as a philosopher, his works as a composer and his creations as an artist reflected his abiding love for pluralism and his deep devotion to the cause of humanity.
Through his progressive writings, Rabindranath endeavoured to bring down the walls of prejudice and remind people of the essential oneness of mankind.
The Visva-Bharati University established by him is, even today, a focal point for international students wanting to experience the cultural and aesthetic values of India and the world.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Rabindranath Tagore was moved by the Bhatayali songs, the songs of the boatmen, the Baul compositions, the kirtans and the folk tunes.
His music perfectly merged the melodies with the poetry that he composed into his famous Rabindra Sangeet.
It is due to his exceptional work that he is revered as the first and greatest composer of modern India.
Today, a hundred and fifty years later, he is still an icon.
Just as his writings are acclaimed by critics and connoisseurs of Bengali literature, his Rabindra Sangeet has been embraced by generations in the sub-continent and studied across the world.
Our own music touches me more deeply by its fundamental lyrical appeal.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
As he reaches out, through his music, to inspire states and their people with his message of tolerance and peace, we pay tribute to him for his unfailing efforts to foster unity and understanding among the communities of the world.
Thank you.
I am happy to join you on this occasion when we recognise and celebrate the dedication of the teaching community in India.
It is a day when we honour, with these national awards, those of you who have contributed in an outstanding way in the field of school education.
I congratulate you as I greet all the teachers of our country and express the collective gratitude of our nation for your service and commitment.
I take this opportunity to recognize the efforts of motivated private and non-governmental organisations for their admirable initiatives in extending education.
The people of India value your contribution to the building of modern India.
He was a mentor and a revered guide to educationists setting the academic priorities of modern India.
It reminds us, even today of the need to constantly introspect and innovate to reorient our teaching content and methodology in response to the changing times.
We should always be guided by the primary aim to make our children self-confident, self-reliant and responsible Indians.
A good education inculcates the habit of tolerance of divergent views and opinions.
A good education makes us spiritually calm.
It inspires us to use our learning to indulge in healthy debate rather than enter into conflict with those who disagree with us.
Yet, we find that despite our accomplishments, we cannot claim to have evolved into a truly developed society.
Development is not only about factories, dams and roads.
Development, to my mind, is about people, their values and their faithfulness to their spiritual and cultural heritage.
As we move forward, it is a holistic education that should play a definitive role in shaping our values.
Here, I see a pivotal role for the teachers in re-setting the moral compass.
The teachers have to help our youth imbibe the essential civilizational values of love for motherland; performance of duty; compassion for all; tolerance for pluralism; respect for women; honesty in life; self-restraint in conduct, responsibility in action and discipline.
They attracted scholars from far and wide.
The powerful minds who taught at such universities created an exalted position for our ancient education system.
We have to regain our leadership position.
We look towards teachers to guide the way.
We need to create systems for continuous assessment of the quality of education and the outcome of our educational inputs.
Participation of the community and parents would be essential in this process so that all stakeholders can ensure the desired results.
A strong spirit of enquiry is a key ingredient in gaining better insights and all these contribute to the making of a rational, free thinking and progressive individual.
We have to empower our children, their parents and communities in every part of India.
They must be afforded the opportunity and the ability to change their lives at a pace that they find is appropriate and beneficial.
A key objective is to close the male-female gap in literacy.
Nothing is more saddening than the sight of a girl child being denied education.
We, in India, are inheritors of a sacred tradition in which our gurus, saints and seers have selflessly nurtured our minds and shaped our intellect.
Imparting knowledge, has, down the ages, been a very methodical, painstaking and sacred transaction in an atmosphere of trust and reverence.
Through words, actions and deeds, such teachers inspire the students and elevate them to a higher level of performance and thinking.
They help to inculcate correct values in their students.
Such inspired teachers should be encouraged to share their knowledge, wisdom and philosophy with the larger student community.
This august body is actively working to improve cooperation among member nations in the field of postal services.
I am glad that it has chosen New Delhi as the venue for its Congress, being held this year.
I welcome all the delegates who have travelled far and wide to be a part of this important gathering of postal administrators.
I also compliment the Department of Posts of the Government of India, for having painstakingly organized this major event.
This Conference is significant as it is the first time this regional group is meeting after the Doha Congress of the Universal Postal Union held one year back.
The deliberations over the next few days shall be instrumental in shaping the future of postal services in the Asia Pacific region.
They will also provide a roadmap for the progress of the global postal sector.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This influential Union has a state of the art training facility at Asian Pacific Postal College, Bangkok.
I am told that it is the only postal training college of its kind in the world.
Through this institution, the Union has been successful in transferring modern management and operational skills to postal workers from member countries.
It is gratifying to note that this college offers scholarships to the participants from less developed countries who want to attend its training courses.
It has initiated various projects aimed at improving the quality of postal services.
It coordinates with the Universal Postal Union for some of the projects.
The Asian Pacific Postal Union has also been assisting the world body in technology induction in the region.
This regional union has a Technology Centre to provide technical support to the member countries.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
For years, post offices have offered traditional services like mail, banking, life insurance, money transfer and other retail services.
With rapid changes in technology, other means of communication such as e-mail and facsimile have become increasingly important.
The volume of letters sent by post has seen a steady decline over the years.
At the same time, there is a rising public expectation about postal services conforming to the same standards of quality, accountability and transparency that are being provided by other market players.
They must be proactive to change.
They must leverage their strengths to provide quality service to the people.
Worldwide, postal administrations enjoy the trust of people.
Having the benefit of an unmatched network, they are best suited to engage with the common man.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
With increasing requirement for remittance channels, it can, with the guidance of the Asian Pacific Postal Union, make a difference.
In 2012, nearly sixty million migrant workers of the Asia Pacific region lived outside their countries of origin.
These migrants remitted two hundred sixty billion US Dollars to their homelands.
Such monetary transfers help in lifting millions of households out of poverty and in improving their living standards.
Post offices and other agencies like banks, money transfer operators, micro finance institutions and mobile operators are key players who can contribute in developing the remittance market.
The vast network of post offices is ideally placed to facilitate greater access to financial services for the people.
In the context of a growing digital economy, the changing customer expectation has made it imperative for postal service providers to innovate and develop services suited to their requirements.
There is a huge scope for postal services to be engaged in e-commerce, and gain from the rising demand for such business products.
As post offices are easily accessible to the community, it can devise a suitable model for allowing small producers and consumers to connect, both within and across national borders.
What is needed within the sector is to determine the appropriate strategy and portfolio of services.
Allow me to throw a word of caution here.
Large networks alone will not guarantee sustainability and profitability.
Post offices have to work with missionary zeal to improve their financial viability, technological capability and human resource ability.
Service must be put before everything else.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Postal services have been an able facilitator to this for a long period of time.
It must continue to do so in the future.
Means of communication have evolved.
This age belongs to people who want quick, reliable and user-friendly medium to communicate.
The postal sector should take up this challenge and offer exciting and vibrant media that encompasses a wide spectrum of services.
Postal administrators in different countries must view this as a great opportunity and make their systems robust to meet consumer expectations.
This Eleventh Congress has been enriched by the participation of distinguished delegates from member countries.
It will be crucial in evolving strategies and providing guidance to postal administrations in the region.
I wish you all a very productive participation and comfortable stay in our country.
I now declare the Eleventh Congress of the Asian Pacific Postal Union at New Delhi open.
I wish this Congress all success.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I am indeed happy to be amidst you this morning on the occasion of the eighth annual convention of Central Information Commission.
This is an important occasion to reflect and introspect about how RTI has impacted on the functioning of the government and citizens.
The Right to Information Act was enacted to secure access to information held by and under the control of government and public authorities in order to promote transparency and accountability in the functioning of the public authority.
It seeks to establish accountable and responsible governance and is a mechanism to create a better balance in the equation of power between those who hold and control information and the citizen who is both the author and beneficiary of democracy.
I call upon all stakeholders to use the occasion of this Convention to deliberate on issues of abiding interest in the areas of Transparency, Accountability and Good Governance.
I am glad this Convention is also being attended by experts from the FICCI, CII and the ASSOCHAM, who would be discussing the commitment and the responsibilities of the corporate and the private sectors in respect of the dissemination of certain basic information relating to their operations.
Such deliberations would strengthen the trust culture in all walks of governance, including the private and public sector.
I am also happy to know that discussions will be held this year on core areas of RTI vis-a-vis inclusive growth, RTI an anti-corruption tool and Media and RTI.
The Commission, through its decisions, has laid down basic principles for disclosure of various classes of information which were not considered fit for disclosure so far.
I am told that the rejection of the requested information has consistently shown a decreasing trend from 7.2% in 2007-08 to 6.4% in 2009-10 and 5.2% in 2010-11.
However the rejection percentage in 2012-13 went up to 7.7%.
The fact that the growth of Appeals and Complaints with the Commission is showing a decreasing rate in percentage terms confirms the notion that quality proactive disclosure and better training of the CPIOs and Appellate Authorities reduces the rejection level.
A large number of appeals/complaints before the Commission, however, are also indicative of the need for enhancement in the quality of voluntary disclosure so that information seekers are not required to join long queues.
Public Authorities in our country must be proactive and voluntarily put information in the public domain for the use of citizens.
The Department of Personnel and Training, Government of India, in April, 2013, has issued detailed guidelines regarding implementation of proactive disclosure obligations of the Ministry/Departments and public authorities under their jurisdiction.
It envisages designating one of the senior officers, not below the rank of Joint Secretary of the Ministry/Departments, as nodal officer with a view to overseeing implementation of obligations under Section 4 of the Act by public authorities and to apprise the top management and the Central Information Commission of its progress.
This has been a long standing demand of large number of civil society organisations.
Through this circular the Central Government has expanded the scope of proactive disclosures and has included inter alia, CAG and PAC audit paras, PPPs, information relating to procurements, foreign tours of senior government functionaries etc.
This circular requires the Ministry/Departments/Public Authorities to make their proactive disclosures audited by the third party and report them to the Government of India and to the Central Information Commission.
Such information placed on a common portal would go a long way in improving monitoring and reporting procedures.
It is also heartening that Department of Personnel & Training has recently launched a portal enabling the citizens to file RTI applications and first appeals online along with formalities to make payments for release of information from large number of information seekers.
The Central Information Commission (CIC) combines within itself the role of a regulator, adjudicator and advisor implementing the Right to Information Act.
It has been actively working with the Planning Commission to build in disclosure obligations in the Public Private Partnership arrangements.
At its initiative, a message on RTI is going to be printed on the cover pages of all NCERT school books.
These initiatives are commendable and I compliment the members and staff of the CIC on having done a good job so far.
Similarly, our enthusiasm about transparency and democracy should not make us ignore, even for a moment, the fact that the citizen who is at the heart of all these arrangements is also an individual with certain inviolable rights to privacy.
There is a wafer thin difference between what is public and what is private.
The RTI Act has provisions which deal with such issues, but there are certain areas which need further clarity.
There is perhaps need to create an arrangement that will provide protection to individuals in case their privacy is breached through unlawful means.
With the improvement in data management practices and by computerization of records and work flow, citizens should be able to locate on their own the status of their requests in the work flow artery of public authorities.
The RTI Act itself mandates such Disclosure and Record Management in Section 4.
We must be able to effectively use information communication technologies (ICTs) to strengthen the implementation of the RTI Act.
The experience of first eight years of the RTI is that it is an important instrument of improving governance.
The RTI Act must not be seen as a zero sum game between the citizen and Public Authorities.
Governance in a democracy is all about fiduciary and trust and the level of a trust between the citizen and the government is one of the best indicators of mature democracy.
The Government must do everything possible to create an informed citizenry which is vital for the functioning of our democracy.
I wish the participants of this Convention the very best and am confident that their deliberations will be highly successful.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
The first time I had the opportunity of interacting with this University was in 2011, in its First Convocation.
I was the Finance Minister then.
A Conference of Vice Chancellors of Central Universities was held in the Rashtrapati Bhavan this year.
A recommendation was made to facilitate technology-enabled interface.
I compliment this University for responding to this call for innovative use of technology.
This initiative will go a long way in bridging distances and bringing academic communities together.
It has constantly made efforts to enhance quality education.
I am told that this University offers post graduate courses in languages, social sciences, basic sciences and development studies.
I feel that this University is ideally placed to blend ancient thought in modern education.
One of the ways to do this is to promote the study of older Indian languages.
The ongoing efforts to introduce emerging disciplines would provide the students wider professional options.
This will result in productive transformation of students in the region.
It is to the credit of the management and faculty that this University has developed remarkably in a short span of four years.
It has received the Award for Best Emerging University in Tribal Areas this year.
I congratulate all of you for this recognition.
I am confident that you will continue to grow with the same spirit of dedication and commitment.
Dear Students:
Democracy not only gives rights but also entails responsibilities.
Educated youth has to play a vital role in building a resurgent new India.
The state and the community invest in the youth by providing facilities for education and self-development.
The education you receive will bring you the opportunity to make a difference.
This is the time to prepare yourself to engage with our beautiful, complex, and sometimes difficult and noisy democracy.
Our universities must produce men and women of character and integrity.
Without these values, it is impossible to achieve anything worthwhile in life.
Along with academic proficiency, our universities must lay great emphasis on character-building.
The value erosion in our society has to be arrested.
Achieving it will depend on our ability to mobilize the knowledge economy.
It has to be built on the edifice of a sound higher education system.
The Eleventh Five Year Plan period was a phase of unprecedented expansion.
Sixty five Central Institutions including twenty one Central Universities were started.
But good quality academic institutions are still few in number.
As a result, many bright students go abroad for higher studies.
We cannot lose this talent pool if we want to become a world power.
An international survey has ranked not a single Indian university amongst the top two hundred universities in the world.
Our ancient academic system had world class universities like Takshashila, Nalanda, Vikramashila, Valabhi, Somapura and Odantapuri.
It ran on the strength of efficient management.
There is no reason why we cannot regain our leadership position in higher education.
A culture of excellence has to be created.
A flexible approach and innovative strategies need to be adopted in our higher education system to meet the challenges of tomorrow.
Our universities must use technology solutions like e-education to address the problems of accessibility, quality, affordability and faculty shortage.
Accessibility and affordability will result in greater inclusion.
It will improve the enrolment rate and enhance the quality of graduates produced.
Friends:
They should provide link between education and social development.
It is gratifying to note that the Central University of Orissa has created a model for education-led development.
The Centre for Tribal Empowerment and Community Development, established in 2010, offers skill development programmes for local tribal youth.
I am told that a Rajiv Gandhi Chair on Tribal Studies is being set up for research on the lives of the tribal people of the region.
This has increased employability and ushered in upward mobility of the deprived.
It will help us to realize the dream of an India which is progressive and equal.
We must guard against any such tendency.
Dear Students:
Our academic system must encourage innovation activity.
The Science, Technology and Innovation Policy, unveiled this year, calls for mentoring grassroots innovation.
Our higher academic centres should act as key medium to pursue this policy.
I call upon the Central University of Orissa to take concrete measures for encouraging an innovation culture.
These will give you the confidence to overcome challenges and the means to succeed in life.
I wish you success in your endeavours.
I also wish the management and faculty of the Central University of Orissa greater achievements in the years to come.
Thank you.
I thank the University management for inviting me to be a part of this beautiful occasion.
I am truly overwhelmed by the lush surroundings of the University Campus.
I compliment this unique abode of higher learning for its efforts at producing highly trained and competent manpower for national development.
Many people suffered from heavy damage to property.
I urge the adequate mobilization of all possible resources in rebuilding the lives and hopes of the people.
In times of adversity, we should never let go the indomitable human spirit for survival and rejuvenation.
This day marks the culmination of the formative phase of an individual.
I congratulate all the graduating students who have toiled hard to achieve success in rigorous education streams.
Its forward march must be spearheaded by the youth of our country.
An awakening of the minds is necessary.
Remember that you are amongst the brightest young people in India.
The governance of our country and issues of national importance should excite you.
Read, analyze and formulate views on them.
12 million people are added to our working age population annually.
We must make this demographic dividend count.
We have to equip our youth with capacity and expertise.
As per a survey, only 7 per cent Indians of working age receive vocational training.
A majority receive only non-formal training.
Large scale formal vocational training is required for developing a capable workforce.
Our average economic growth per year during the Eleventh Plan period was 8.0 per cent.
We have envisaged growing at this level during the Twelfth Plan period also.
Though our economy is challenged by global factors in the short term, we must feel confident that we will be able to overcome these hurdles.
I have confidence in the youth of the country that they will overcome all hurdles.
Our economic progress will depend on how well we marshal crucial growth centres like the energy sector.
To sustain high levels of consumption, our energy resources are inadequate.
Energy Intensity, which is a measure of energy efficiency of an economy, indicates that India uses more energy to produce one unit of GDP, than nations like UK, Germany, Japan and US.
To achieve a high growth rate while meeting the energy needs of the population poses a challenge to us.
It calls for higher energy production and for devising measures that promote energy efficiency.
We must explore alternative energy models to reduce our dependence on conventional sources.
There is need for domain knowledge, for developing capabilities and strengthening systems through innovation.
Policy making should be proactive to identify problems, highlight trends, develop scenarios, and recommend policy options, so as to avert any crisis.
If an academic framework to various issues associated with energy could be provided, it will significantly contribute to the understanding of our policy makers.
We must have a pool of institutions in our country dedicated to raising the technological capabilities of our energy systems and expanding the knowledge frontier on issues of energy and energy security.
UPES, as a specialized energy university, has a crucial role to generate state-of-art knowledge to fulfill the needs of the energy sector.
Our higher education sector must be equipped to complement the economic forces.
It is a matter of concern that an international ranking of top two hundred universities does not contain a single Indian institution.
This is an eye-opener for us, especially as our ancient universities like Takshashila, Nalanda, Vikramashila, Valabhi, Somapura and Odantapuri had dominated the world higher education system for about eighteen hundred years beginning Sixth Century BC.
But today, many bright young minds from India go abroad for better quality higher studies.
We can develop our academic institutions to provide education conforming to international standards.
We can usher in excellence in the way our institutions are run and education in them imparted.
The time of static academic institutions responding cautiously to new challenges is over.
Academic institutions are a service provider and the quality of service delivery matters.
Students are an active recipient of education.
They are demand centres and increasingly seek to redefine knowledge requirement.
The institutions must be proactive, dynamic and interactive.
The benefits of technology should be applied to enable refinement in teaching methodology.
For instance, e-classrooms can overcome physical distance by virtual diffusion of information and knowledge.
These skills are necessary for healthy development of an individual, and should find due place in the course curriculum.
Our academic institutions also have a duty to address the moral challenges of the times.
They must act as guides and inculcate the essential civilizational values of love for motherland; performance of duty; compassion for all; tolerance for pluralism; respect for women; honesty in life; self-restraint in conduct; responsibility in action, and discipline in the minds of our youth.
To effect beneficial changes in society, we must strengthen the drive to innovation.
It will also give us an edge over our competitors.
We need to improve on this record.
We must revitalize research and development.
Research is unfortunately not a preferred option, accounting for less than 0.4 per cent of our higher education student population.
To promote a healthy environment for research, we must increase the number of fellowships, support inter-disciplinary and inter-university collaborations and establish industry incubation parks.
The Science, Technology and Innovation Policy, unveiled this year, aims at innovation-led development.
This policy portrays the need to right-size our research and development system.
It delineates a strategy for encouraging novel ideas that can benefit the common man.
Our higher academic institutions should take the lead in mentoring grassroots innovations for their development into viable products.
I am happy to witness today the exciting innovations made in UPES.
I am told that patent has been granted on the multi-fuel cook stove.
I call upon this University to continue pursuing research and innovation in a big way.
In the vast ocean of knowledge, you must be eager to learn from every wave that reaches the shore.
You must have a thirst for knowledge and that thirst must remain with you for life.
Success will belong to lifelong learners.
Wherever you are, whatever you do, never be shy to learn.
I am sure you will take the path of hard work, sincerity and conviction to be a winner in life.
I wish you all the very best.
As I entered this Institute, I was reminded of my visit in 1996 as the Chairman of the Parliamentary Committee to review the findings of herbal fuel investigated by IIP.
This Institute was set up in 1960 to pursue research and development for the downstream oil industry.
It is an important constituent of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR).
With the full support of Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru, he created CSIR and established a chain of thirty seven national laboratories to carry out cutting edge research.
I fondly recall my association with CSIR when, as the Finance Minister, I was a member of the CSIR Society.
I remember having heard presentations about CSIR and the wonderful work that it has been doing for the scientific advancement of our nation.
I am particularly pleased with their efforts at assisting the people affected by the recent unprecedented disaster in Uttarakhand.
I thank CSIR for taking the initiative to pool products, technologies, resources and knowledge of all its laboratories to provide basic amenities such as potable water, high energy foods, non leather footwear and temporary shelters to the distressed people.
With rising crude oil prices, depreciating domestic currency and increasing oil imports, we stare at an acute prospect of having to incur huge foreign exchange outgo to buy expensive energy.
Energy security has become synonymous with national security.
It has been projected that by 2030, we would have to meet 90 per cent of crude oil, 60 per cent of natural gas and 57 per cent of coal requirements through imports.
I am yet to hear a debate by our scientists and technologists as to how our country can become self-sufficient in energy.
Even the more optimistic experts point out that India has insufficient energy resources.
A few years ago, a similar debate was heard in the US.
But US has proved everyone wrong as it has turned itself from being a huge net energy importer to being self-sufficient through the discovery of shale gas.
This has been possible because of a crucial technological breakthrough in efficient recovery of shale gas.
Many relatively weak countries have transformed into emerging economies within a short span of time on the strength of technology.
Science and technology is duly recognized as the vehicle to take India into the front ranking nations of the world.
We have to make the forces of science, technology and innovation partners in our progress.
Our future development depends on our ability to devise efficient processes for the industrial sector and better solutions for governance.
Though innovation is a long standing feature of our civilization; though there is no dearth of ingenuity in our people; we today lag behind the advanced nations in innovation activity.
It is heartening to note that CSIR has started a mission called CSIR-800 to develop technologies, products and services for the benefit of the poor.
The recent deluge in Uttarakhand is a wakeup call for all of us.
We need energy to sustain growth but it has to be ecologically safe.
It also has to be affordable for our countrymen.
These are the defining parameters for developing future technologies.
These are stiff challenges indeed; but they are also exciting opportunities for our research community, including the scientists of this great Institute.
During my visit to the Advanced Crude Oil Research Centre today, I was glad to observe several eco-friendly innovations, particularly the technology to convert waste plastic to fuel and for making jet fuel from non-edible vegetable oils.
It provides technological assistance to the hydrocarbon industry.
It has core competency in the evaluation of crude oil feed stocks.
The detailed hydrocarbon analysis carried out by the Advanced Crude Oil Research Centre of the Institute are used extensively in the pricing of crude oils; transportation and absorption of new crude in refineries; designing new refineries; and expanding existing ones.
It is a matter of pride that this laboratory has till date evaluated more than five hundred crude oils.
This has immensely boosted domestic refining capabilities.
I am told that the crude from Mumbai High region, which initially posed a difficulty in transportation, later became a sought after source for many refineries after extensive finger printing carried out at this laboratory.
As the oil sector in our country develops further, it will be required to process heavier and more complex crudes.
A new Advanced Crude Oil Research Centre at the IIP, which has the latest infrastructure for finger printing of crude and allied products and for exploring innovative ways to develop future fuels, will help meet our requirements.
I am confident that it will serve its intended purpose of providing critical assistance to the oil industry and supporting the technological ambitions of our nation.
Our visionary leaders laid the foundation of great institutions like Indian Institutes of Technologies, Indian Institutes of Managements and a huge network of national laboratories including CSIR laboratories.
It should be your endeavor to make this Institute world class.
Research institutions in the energy sector have a responsibility to develop cutting edge technologies to make our industry globally competitive.
Remember that a country like Japan, who is completely dependent on others to meet their energy requirements, is an exporter of high-end technologies.
We as a nation must achieve technology security.
You have a big contribution to make to turn this vision into reality.
Complement your efforts by pursuing knowledge networking across the scientific community.
I, on behalf of this country, its agricultural scientists, farmers and people, extend a warm welcome to all of you.
Progress is possible only if the health of its population is secured.
There are many regions in the world where food deprivation persists.
Steps are required to secure for the poor and the needy greater access to food.
Many nations are tied to the imperative of bringing greater inclusivity in their growth process.
The inter-dependent objectives of poverty alleviation, mitigation of food inadequacy, creation of rural employment and growth in rural incomes can be achieved by substantial expansion in food production.
In national policy making, food production deserves very high priority.
His pioneering work in the mid-twentieth century in developing semi-dwarf, high-yield and disease-resistant wheat varieties has saved millions of people from hunger and deprivation in many countries.
In 1998, a new form of stem rust was identified in Uganda that could overcome the resistance gene developed by Dr. Borlaug and others fifty years back.
Ninety per cent of wheat varieties became susceptible to this rust.
Dr. Borlaug called for greater investment in agricultural research as well as coordinated efforts of research partners.
BGRI was born out of this urge to fight the new threat.
In India, it is the staple diet in the northern and central regions.
Wheat cultivation dates back to the Indus Valley Civilization.
Recent studies indicate that it may have taken place in the past even in the peninsular regions of present day Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh.
Modern wheat breeding in India began in the first decade of the twentieth century at the then Imperial Agricultural Research Institute in Pusa.
In 1947, the year India became a free nation, it produced 7 million tonne of wheat.
The agriculture system was underdeveloped.
Food grains production was not enough to feed every citizen of this country.
Through the fifties and early sixties, to meet the nutritional requirements of our population, we depended on imports to supplement our agricultural yield.
Severe drought in the mid sixties affected agricultural productivity.
At the same time, it strengthened our resolve to become self-sufficient in food grains production.
In 1949, my distinguished antecessor, Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, who would become the second President of this country, headed the first Education Commission of India.
The commission recommended the setting up of rural universities on the American land-grant model.
To promote agricultural education in this country, agricultural universities were established through collaboration with several American universities.
A strong foundation for agricultural research was laid and it has played a pivotal role in the agricultural development of India.
The source of this strain was traced to the Cooperative Wheat Research Production Program, a joint effort of the Rockefeller Foundation and the Mexican Ministry of Agriculture, headed by Dr. Norman Borlaug.
The seeds planted resulted in yields higher than any harvested in South Asia until then.
Dr. Borlaug's visit also set the stage for the subsequent introduction of high yielding wheat varieties developed by our agricultural universities.
The untiring efforts of scientists and researchers at the various institutes of ICAR, including the Directorate of Wheat Research, and state agricultural universities have provided farmers with new wheat varieties and technical know-how to increase the yield of their crop.
From being a net importer, we have become a nation self-sufficient in food grains.
India is now the second largest wheat producer in the world.
It is also the second biggest wheat exporter.
In 2012-13, we have produced 92.5 million tonne of wheat, after setting a record of 94.9 million tonne the previous year.
From 0.8 tonne per hectare in 1947, we now produce wheat at the rate of 3 tonne per hectare.
The quantum leap in productivity is a measure of success of our food grain production programme.
Dr. Borlaug, along with the Indian scientific community most notably Dr. Swaminathan, were the driving force behind this spectacular achievement.
This region today is the largest contiguous wheat growing region in the world.
Dr. Borlaug, for developing high yielding wheat varieties and for his fight against stem rust, earned the Nobel Peace Prize in 1970.
He continued in his role as teacher, researcher and activist and worked tirelessly to find ways to improve crop yields and ensure food security.
Since 1965, four hundred three wheat varieties have been developed and released for commercial cultivation in the six wheat growing zones of the country.
These varieties have been released after stringent evaluation for yield, nutritional content and disease resistance.
Balanced use of fertilizers and pesticides should also be propagated amongst the farming community as their disproportionate use could eventually lead to a decline in productivity.
In many regions of the world, agriculture is still in the grip of weather.
Prevention of crop failure calls for greater use of communication technology for weather forecasting and information technology for its effective dissemination to the farmers.
To manage the risk of crop failure due to natural calamities, pests and diseases, mechanisms such as agricultural insurance must be strengthened.
Scientists in India and other countries in South Asia are working round the clock in a coordinated effort to monitor the spread of wheat rust and develop varieties that are resistant to this threat.
Whenever there has been a challenge to food security in the world, the scientific community with its boundless ingenuity, has been at the forefront of human response.
I am confident that BGRI will be able to pool the efforts of all its partners productively and overcome the threat to wheat production caused by disease.
Today, it is with great pride that I declare the commencement of the fifth International Technical Workshop of BGRI.
I am confident of meaningful answers emanating from the deliberations.
On the eve of the 66th anniversary of our Independence, I extend warm greetings to you and to all Indians around the world.
Gandhiji sought freedom from both foreign rule as well as the indigenous social chains that had imprisoned our society for long.
He launched every Indian on a path of self-belief and hope for a better future.
He promised freedom from want and deprivation.
For nearly seven decades now we have been masters of our destiny.
Democracy is much more than the right to vote every five years; its essence is the aspirations of the masses; its spirit must influence the responsibilities of the leaders and duties of the citizens every day.
Democracy breathes through a vibrant Parliament, an independent judiciary, a responsible media, a vigilant civil society, and a bureaucracy committed to integrity and hard work.
It survives through accountability, not profligacy.
And yet we have allowed unbridled personal enrichment, self-indulgence, intolerance, discourtesy in behavior and disrespect for authority to erode our work culture.
The biggest impact of the decay in the moral fiber of our society is on the hopes and aspirations of the young and the poor.
We have to pay heed to his advice as we work towards building a modern democracy.
Today we see widespread cynicism and disillusionment with the governance and functioning of institutions in our country.
Our legislatures look more like combat arenas, rather than fora that legislate.
Corruption has become a major challenge.
The precious resources of the nation are being wasted through indolence and indifference.
It is sapping the dynamism of our society.
We need to correct this regression.
This balance has to be maintained.
We need a Parliament that debates, discusses and decides.
We need a judiciary that gives justice without delays.
We need leadership that is committed to the nation and those values that made us a great civilization.
We need a state that inspires confidence among people in its ability to surmount challenges before us.
We cannot aspire to be a world class power without a single world class university.
History records that we were the cynosure of the world once.
Takshashila, Nalanda, Vikramashila, Valabhi, Somapura and Odantapuri comprised the ancient university system that dominated the world for eighteen hundred years beginning Sixth Century BC.
They were a magnet for the finest minds and scholars in the world.
We must seek to regain that space.
We have to rapidly empower the local bodies with functions, functionaries and finances to improve their performance.
Faster growth has given us the resources, but larger outlays have not translated into better outcomes.
Without inclusive governance, we cannot achieve inclusive growth.
While growth builds the scope for redistribution, redistribution sustains growth over time.
Both are equally important.
A disproportionate emphasis on any one, at the expense of the other, can have adverse consequences for the nation.
During this period, our economy grew annually at an average rate of 7.9 per cent.
We are today self-sufficient in food grains production.
We are the largest exporter of rice and second largest exporter of wheat in the world.
The record production of 18.45 million tonne of pulses this year augurs well for our march towards self-sufficiency in pulses.
This was unthinkable just a few years ago.
This momentum has to be sustained.
In a globalized world, with increasing economic complexities, we have to learn to cope better with adversities, both external and domestic.
To keep this lamp aflame, our highest priority has to be the elimination of poverty.
Though a declining trend in the poverty rate is clearly visible, our fight against this scourge is far from over.
India has the talent, ability and the resources to overcome this challenge.
Favorable demographic changes over the next two decades can pay us handsome dividends.
It requires industrial transformation and rapid creation of employment opportunities.
It also requires an orderly urbanization process.
Several initiatives taken by the Government in the recent past including the New Manufacturing Policy, the renewal of urban infrastructure and the ambitious skill training programme will need close monitoring in the coming years.
We now have to ensure that these entitlements lead to real empowerment for the people.
We need robust delivery mechanisms to make these legislations work.
New benchmarks of efficient public service delivery and accountability have to be established.
The Direct Benefits Transfer Scheme, launched earlier this year, will bring in greater transparency, enhance efficiency and eliminate wastage of precious resources.
The consequences of such imbalance can be disastrous.
This tragedy owes as much to the avarice of human nature as to the rage of Mother Nature.
And it is time to wake up.
The barbaric face of Maoist violence in Chhattisgarh led to a loss of many innocent lives.
Despite India's consistent efforts to build friendly relations with neighbours, there have been tensions on the border and repeated violations of the Ceasefire on the Line of Control, leading to tragic loss of lives.
Our commitment to peace is unfailing but even our patience has limits.
All steps necessary to ensure internal security and protect the territorial integrity of the nation will be taken.
I applaud the courage and heroism of our security and armed forces who maintain eternal vigilance and pay homage to those who have made the supreme sacrifice of the most precious gift of life in the service of the motherland.
This great festival of democracy, is an opportunity for us to elect a stable government which will ensure security and economic development.
Let us not squander this extraordinary opportunity.
The journey ahead calls for wisdom, courage and determination.
We must work on across-the-board revival of our values and institutions.
We must realize that rights go with responsibilities.
We must re-discover the virtue of self-scrutiny and self-restraint.
I am happy to be here in Chennai this evening to deliver the First Rukmini Devi Memorial Lecture.
Kalakshetra is hallowed ground.
It has been sanctified further because of its decades of adherence to all things glorious in our heritage.
It stands as, not just a testament to beauty and a tangible legacy, but also to the teaching of the classical arts and the guru-sishya parampara.
In fact, Gurudev was one of the early patrons of the Besant Memorial School which has since become a part of the Kalakshetra Foundation.
Gurudev is also believed to have been so captivated by the name Kalakshetra, that he remarked had the name occurred to him when he founded Santiniketan, he would have chosen it for the institution that he founded!
He was the Chancellor of the National University, founded by him and Annie Besant, of which George Arundale was made Principal in 1913.
Standing here, other crisscrosses and interweaves present themselves to us.
What Kalakshetra is to Tiruvanmiyur, Santiniketan is to Bolpur.
What Kalakshetra is to Chennai, Santiniketan is to Kolkata.
They are havens of peace; temples of the arts; and beacons for humanity.
They were not set up to sequester, but to protect the arts and to provide a nourishing womb for their development.
The protection meant providing a moment of pause from the loud cycles of life.
Ritu, the Sanskrit word for season, derives from the Vedic Sanskrit word Rta which means the order or course of things.
The accumulation and the aggregation of human thought and the exaltation of aesthetics coupled with the refinement of thought, word and movement over millennia, have given us the various streams of classical culture.
This makes the streams of classical culture our link with the past.
They are the foundation for our current thought and by extension, the platform for our future action.
We are at a time when the ritus are ever-changing and the matrix of human interaction with the physical environment is changing.
Among the many steps we need to take are the steps to shelter the ritus in classical culture.
Today, the task before us is to preserve them and aid their continued flourishing in the best possible manner, with institutions like Kalakshetra providing the bedrock of support in this crucial societal responsibility.
Jai Hind.
Thank you.
It is indeed a privilege for me to be associated with the eighty fifth foundation day of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) and I am honoured to deliver the foundation day speech to address this gathering of eminent agricultural scientists and policy makers.
ICAR was set up with an important mandate to plan and promote education, research and its application in agriculture, agro-forestry, animal husbandry, home science, fisheries and allied sciences.
It has today a comprehensive institutional infrastructure including four deemed universities, forty seven central institutes, seventeen national research centres and twenty five project directorates to carry out its objectives.
I am told that ICAR has developed soil fertility maps for five hundred districts in 21 states; decision support systems for efficient nutrient management; watershed development models; resource conservation technologies in the Indo-Gangetic basin; 300 improved varieties of field crops; and 186 varieties of horticultural crops.
The technologies and human resources developed by ICAR have made a stellar contribution in increasing agricultural productivity and production.
Food grains production was not enough to feed every citizen.
During 1946 to 1952, we imported on an average 3 million tonne of food grains annually.
National food security became naturally a priority agenda for national development.
Research and development programmes were launched; new technologies, especially the seeds of high yielding rice and wheat varieties were procured and adopted.
As a result, food grain production started increasing, and food imports ultimately ended.
It has transformed from being a food-deficient to food surplus country and an exporter of agricultural produce.
This, in the face of an ever increasing population, is a laudable achievement with few parallels.
Our agriculture has become more resilient.
Despite our country facing two severe droughts during the last decade, our agricultural production remained well above the 200 million tonne mark of grain production.
Once again, I compliment the agricultural research and development system of our country for their untiring efforts.
I am told that agriculture is now poised for a Rainbow Revolution fuelled by technology-induced growth in horticulture, livestock and fisheries sectors.
Yet, there are challenges that lie ahead.
Agriculture is the single biggest source of livelihood in our country.
Some studies have indicated that a one percentage growth in agriculture is two to three times more effective in reducing poverty than a one percentage growth in non-farm sectors.
The average growth rate in Agriculture and Allied sectors during the Eleventh Plan period was 3.6 per cent as against the average growth rate of the total economy of 8.0 per cent during this period.
To alleviate poverty, promote inclusive growth on a sustainable basis, sustain food security, increase employment opportunities and boost rural incomes, our agriculture sector must be robust.
The agricultural growth in the Eleventh Plan period was driven by improved agricultural prices.
During the Twelfth Plan period, the growth in demand for major crops is projected to slow down.
We have to achieve higher productivity levels to attain the agricultural growth target for this Plan period.
We must place greater emphasis on productivity-driving measures such as diversification of crops, improvement in seed replacement rate, adoption of high yielding hybrid seeds, and improvement in water management practices.
Though the Green Revolution in the Sixties and Seventies brought about a considerable rise in food production, the disproportionate use of chemical fertilizers eventually led to a decline in productivity.
The need for balanced use of fertilizers and pesticides should be propagated amongst our farming community through agriculture education and extension programmes.
ICAR and other agricultural institutions are engaged to promote fertilizer use efficiency.
Latest technology must be deployed to assist decision-making by farmers regarding selection of crop variety, right agricultural practices and right markets to sell the produce.
At the same time, rice production in agriculturally advanced areas of North-Western India has become unsustainable due to over exploitation of natural resources like land and water.
We have devised a strategy for increasing production and productivity in the Eastern region to ensure food security, while reducing pressure on the North-Western region.
As part of the Union Budget for 2010-11 a four-fold strategy was delineated covering agricultural production, reduction in wastage, credit support and thrust to the food processing sector.
I am happy to note that as a result of these initiatives, farmers in the selected clusters have adopted new technology, good agricultural practices and benefitted from the yield advantage of hybrid rice technology.
To spur productivity growth in such farmlands, it is necessary to develop low-cost, light-weight, multi-purpose farm equipments.
Mechanization of small farms is the need of the hour as it can also mitigate labour scarcity during peak season.
Mechanization in agriculture should be facilitated by efficient energy management.
To reduce dependence on conventional fuels and ensure sustainability, our research institutions must focus on renewable energy models like solar power and biofuels.
Timely availability of affordable quality seeds is crucial for achieving higher agricultural production.
I am happy to note that ICAR and the State Agricultural Universities are engaged in production of breeder seed of all major crops to meet the requirements.
About 50 per cent of these losses are preventable, using suitable post-harvest technologies.
Research should focus on cost-effective packaging technology to ensure easy transportation, product safety and prolonged shelf life.
The National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture, launched under the National Action Plan on Climate Change, seeks to devise adaptation and mitigation strategies for ensuring food security.
As the impact of climate change could transcend geo-political boundaries, we must actively engage with all national and international initiatives to chalk out a climate resilient development strategy.
The concerns over their perceived risks should be addressed by following internationally accepted procedures for assessing safety parameters.
ICAR, which is involved in developing useful products and technologies in this field, must contribute to the public discourse and provide clarity on this sensitive issue.
Agricultural education should focus on the contemporary challenges of food insecurity; declining productivity; depletion of natural resources; increased risk from climate change; regional imbalance; rising input costs; changing food habits, and post-harvest management.
It must provide an academic framework to these issues for greater understanding by our policy makers.
The quality and relevance of agricultural research must be enhanced to bring within its domain cutting edge technologies like biosensors, genomics, biotechnology, nanotechnology and alternative energy sources.
There are millions of farmers tilling on small and marginal holdings.
Our challenge is to reach out to the last farmland and equip them with the best cultivation methods.
Improving the quality of agricultural education holds the key to driving not only agricultural growth but also developing technologies for sustainable agriculture leading to livelihood and nutritional security.
I call upon the scientific fraternity to work towards a technology-led path for development of agriculture and prosperity for the farming community.
It has achieved results of great significance to this country and to the vast multitude of humanity.
Your contributions; your relentless pursuit for excellence in agricultural education and research, gives us the courage to believe in ourselves; to aspire for an India free from hunger, poverty and deprivation.
I am sure, as in the past, you will continue to live up to the great expectations of this great country.
From a mere 12 students when it started, it has a student population of 4,800 today.
It has proliferated from just two disciplines to nine under-graduate and eighteen post-graduate programmes in various branches of engineering, science, humanities and management.
Its PhD programmes are devoted to cutting edge research and technology.
In its endeavour to keep pace with the latest trends in curriculum and technical resources, it has instituted Centres of Excellence for Energy and Environment, Design, and Materials Research.
The success of this Institution is the result of the vision, commitment and labour of its past and serving faculty members.
A visionary, statesman, scholar, educationist and social reformer, Malaviyaji made a sterling contribution in creating a holistic template of education in our country.
He wanted our educational institutions to take the best of eastern learning and western scientific knowledge.
He felt that the objective of higher education should be to provide a bridge between scientific knowledge and societal needs.
He wanted students to be inculcated with human values and a sense of social commitment.
The fact that in the India of today, our society is still bothered by moral unrest, reminds us of the task ahead of us.
Perhaps, the time has come to reset our moral compass.
We must reverse the value erosion in society, and for that, we must instill in our youth the essential civilizational values of love for motherland; performance of duty; compassion for all; tolerance for pluralism; respect for women; honesty in life; self-restraint in conduct; responsibility in action, and discipline.
Our academic institutions must play a leading role in guiding the young minds in this direction.
You must understand that considerable resource, effort and sacrifice have gone into your education.
Society has invested in you and society can legitimately demand a dividend from you.
You can pay this dividend by helping those who are weak, needy and deprived.
The destiny of our nation will be shaped by your will power, initiative and ingenuity.
Change often precedes progress.
If you feel anything is hindering our progress; our growth, change it.
Do not join the brigade that only clamours for change; join hands with those who believes in doing.
When we gained Independence, our colonial rulers left us with an India afflicted by poverty, hunger, illiteracy and backwardness.
During the period 1900 to 1950 India's economy grew at a rate of 1.5 percent.
A major development exercise was initiated by our leaders and in the next 30 years, we grew at a rate of 3.5 per cent.
This grew to 5.5 per cent in the 80's and 6 per cent in the 90's.
Despite a global slowdown and several bad years, our economy grew at 7.5 per cent in the last ten years.
All this development became possible because our founding fathers emphasised science and technology.
Innovation has lent competitive edge to business, and provided solution for effective governance.
Technological applications like mobile telephony, internet, e-transfer of benefits, e-medicine and e-education have made the lives of common citizens much easier.
Governments around the world are making a concerted effort to encourage innovation.
We have dedicated the decade 2010-20 to innovation.
We have formulated the Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) Policy this year, for innovation to spur development.
This policy calls for an eco-system where innovation activity thrives.
It portrays the need to right-size our research and development system.
India spends only 0.9 per cent of GDP on research and development, which is much below that of China, UK and Israel.
We need to step up our expenditure on research to pursue large scale innovation.
Academic and research positions in them are afflicted by talent deficiency.
Our systems are not conducive to retaining talent, and we lose many of them to organizations within and outside the country.
We should evolve mechanisms to discourage this outflow of intellectual capital.
At the same time, we must encourage Indian scholars working abroad in important research and teaching positions to return to the country to take up short-term assignments.
Such a policy could reap our nation with benefits such as transmission of ideas and new methods of teaching and research.
The Indian innovation strategy should focus on generating ideas that promote inclusive growth and benefit people at the bottom of the socio-economic pyramid.
Our higher academic institutions should play a vital role in inclusive innovation.
They should mentor grassroots innovators for development of their ideas into useful products.
A recommendation was made in a Conference of Vice Chancellors of Central Universities held in the Rashtrapati Bhavan this year to set up Innovators Clubs in Central Universities.
They would be a platform for the teaching and student communities and grassroots innovators to exchange ideas.
I am hopeful of this initiative being replicated in other institutes.
I call upon NIT Jaipur to encourage innovators in this region.
You may be a student of a particular discipline.
But remember that in the supreme pursuit of truth, different disciplines have to complement one another.
To understand the complete truth, you must diligently pursue holistic learning.
Be open to seek knowledge in whatever form it is presented to you.
As you leave your alma mater today and prepare yourself for tomorrow, be assured in the knowledge that you have gained here.
Everyday of your life will be an opportunity for you to learn.
The thirst for knowledge should remain with you for life.
Use your knowledge for the greater good of people.
Be successful, more so in the number of lives that you touch.
I wish you all the very best in life and career.
I also wish the management and faculty of this Institute all success.
I am happy to inaugurate the Innovation and Incubation Centre (IIC) established by the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Jodhpur.
I congratulate the Institute for this pioneering initiative aimed at linking the creativity and innovativeness prevalent at the grassroots to the formal education system.
This linkage must be strengthened to enable the innovators convert their ideas and innovations into marketable products.
I am happy that IIT Jodhpur is working in collaboration with the State Government and has taken up the Rajasthan Vidyarthi Initiative.
13 teams from engineering colleges have been selected through competition for funding and incubation to develop low cost hardware solutions for health monitoring of women and children.
I am hopeful of this framework promoting more innovations in social entrepreneurship.
I am sure IIC will reap this benefit and provide fillip to industrial development and employment generation in this region.
It is gratifying to note that this Centre intends to incubate entrepreneurs to develop ancillary products like controllers and emulators for the large number of solar and wind energy installations in Jodhpur and adjoining areas.
The process of innovation converts knowledge into social good and economic wealth.
It breeds a culture of deep thought and brings in poise, balance and discernment in behaviour.
It encourages the engagement of young talent with the society to improve the quality of life.
I call upon the faculty and students of this Institute to search, spread, sense and celebrate innovations in the region.
Similar initiatives have come up in several universities and institutes in our country.
Let the festival of innovations in our country spread far and wide.
It is a privilege and honour for me to deliver the first Convocation Address of the Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur.
I congratulate the Chairman, the Director, distinguished members of the board, faculty, staff and students on having built a good reputation for IIT Jodhpur as a premier technology institute, both nationally and internationally, within a very short period of time.
Convocation is an important occasion marking the end of a vital phase in the life of a student.
My heartiest congratulation goes to all graduating students of IIT Jodhpur.
I am sure you would agree that your success would not have been possible without the support and contribution of your family members and faculty.
I am happy to know that IIT Jodhpur has introduced under graduation programs such as Systems Science and Bio inspired System Science, where existing frontiers of science are challenged through interaction between various disciplines ranging from art, humanities, engineering, Biotechnology, Quantum Physics, econometrics, systems thinking and systems dynamics.
India today stands at the cusp of greatness.
While there are challenges ahead, there are enormous opportunities as well.
Science and technology is duly recognized as the vehicle to take India into the front ranks of the nations of the world.
We have to build a large pool of scientific and technical manpower to aid our progress.
We have a growing young population.
Within a decade, we are likely to have the largest workforce in the world.
This demographic transformation must be leveraged by us by expanding technical education in the country.
An important initiative taken in this direction during the Eleventh Plan period was to extend the famed IIT system by opening eight new IITs.
As the youngest of IITs, IIT Jodhpur has the important task of not only maintaining the high standards that IITs are known for but also carving out a special position for itself in the engineering education sector.
The recent increase in cases of brutal assault on women and children has shaken the collective conscience of our nation.
These unfortunate incidents call for effective measures to ensure their safety and security.
It also highlights the need for us to bring such degradation of values to an immediate halt.
More so, it calls for all of us to engage in self introspection and reset our moral compass.
Our institutes of learning beginning from schools must act as guides in meeting the contemporary moral challenges and ensure that our civilizational values of love for motherland; performance of duty; compassion for all; tolerance for pluralism; respect for women and elderly; truth and honesty in life; discipline and self-restraint in conduct, and responsibility in action are fully entrenched in the young minds.
Our higher education sector today does not have enough good quality institutions to meet the growing aspirations of our youth.
Along with measures to increase quantity, the drive to enhance the quality of education should engage the attention of our policy makers.
It is a matter of concern that the list of top two hundred universities in the world does not contain a single Indian institution.
The past has not been like this for us.
Ancient Indian universities like Takshashila, Nalanda, Vikramashila, Valabhi, Somapura and Odantapuri had dominated the world higher education system for about eighteen hundred years beginning Sixth Century BC.
The colossal Indian education system was marked by a high degree of efficiency before it declined in the Thirteenth Century AD with the collapse of Nalanda.
We have the capability to regain our lost position.
It is possible for at least a few of our universities to enter the global top league.
But for that, necessary changes are required in the way our institutes are managed and education in them delivered.
There must be flexibility in academic management.
A culture of excellence must be inculcated in them.
Every university should nurture one or two departments that can be converted into a Centre of Excellence.
Technology can enable refinement in teaching methodology.
It can address the challenges of quantity, quality, accessibility, affordability and faculty shortage.
E-classrooms permit information and knowledge sharing by wider dispersal of lectures overcoming distance.
As expertise in a particular field is usually scattered, experts should be encouraged to interact for significant gains to accrue to the discipline.
The National Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology is an important initiative in this direction.
Higher education should not be a product accessible to only the privileged few.
This calls for growth of quality educational institutions across the length and breadth of our country.
It also highlights the need to institutionalize various student aid schemes to make education affordable for meritorious students from economically difficult backgrounds.
Increasing accessibility of higher education will bring a greater section of youth into the system resulting in a larger pool of trained and competent manpower to fuel the growth centres of our economy.
Innovation is increasingly recognized as the currency of the future.
It lends a competitive edge to business, and provides solution for effective governance.
It is, therefore, hardly surprising that governments around the world are making a concerted effort to encourage innovation.
Our institutes of higher learning, especially IITs, should be the breeders of innovation activity.
An encouraging eco-system comprising research fellowship, and inter-disciplinary and inter-university research cooperation is required for that.
The decade 2010-20 has been declared in India as the decade of innovation.
We have formulated the Science, Technology and Innovation Policy this year, aimed at an innovation-led development.
This policy highlights the need to encourage and recognize innovators, including grass root innovators, who by their sheer brilliance have added value to processes for the benefit of the common man.
Centres of higher learning and IITs have a crucial role to play in these efforts.
I congratulate IIT Jodhpur for the initiative it has taken to set up an innovation and incubation centre in association with the Rajasthan Government.
I hope this example will be emulated by others.
I congratulate the students who have become graduates today.
You are not only a valuable asset for your profession but also the intellectual wealth of our nation.
You are the product of an education system of a new nation born out of an old civilization.
You must fully understand the democratic ideals of our country.
You must not only embrace the rights that are provided in our polity but also accept whole-heartedly your responsibilities towards the nation.
The governance of our country and issues of national importance should excite you.
Read, learn and formulate views on them.
A healthy democracy is marked by informed participation.
Inform yourself and inform others.
Choose to engage with our beautiful, complex, often difficult and sometimes noisy democracy.
Help the nation create better citizens who understand their rights and responsibilities.
I am confident that the education imparted here in IIT Jodhpur would produce skilled professionals who would enhance the intellectual capital of the nation as well as pave the way for their own self-advancement.
My best wishes to all the students graduating today.
I would like to end by quoting Mahatma Gandhi.
It is indeed a privilege for me to be here to present the National Awards for Outstanding Services in the field of Prevention of Alcoholism and Substance (Drug) Abuse.
This is a well deserved recognition of institutions and individuals who, with a strong will and courage have achieved difficult goals while addressing a very challenging social problem.
They have been recognized for making an outstanding contribution in the prevention of addiction, awareness generation, research and innovation, psychiatric treatment, rehabilitation and similar efforts to address the problem and related issues.
It is indeed a fit occasion for us, as a society, to re-affirm our commitment to this cause.
Addiction to drugs and alcohol not only fells individuals, but it also deeply impacts the life and morale of all those connected to them.
The worst sufferers are their families.
Their preoccupation with a family member who has fallen prey to alcoholism or drug addiction is a curse; their misery weakens the very fibre of their society.
For a nation like India, given our demographic profile, alcoholism and drug abuse are a matter of serious concern.
There is an urgent need for concerted efforts of all stakeholders to prevent and eradicate this menace.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The Constitution of India, in Article 47, specifically directs the State to prohibit the consumption of intoxicating drinks and drugs that are injurious to health.
The Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substance Act, 1985 makes stringent provisions for the control of illicit trafficking of drugs; it empowers Government to establish centres for the prevention and treatment, of drug addiction.
Schemes and programmes should effectively reach the target groups - including through partnerships with the private sector and civil society.
They should be in keeping with the evolving needs of the vulnerable sections of our society.
We should have more outreach programs that bring to the youth the stark facts about substance abuse.
While de-addiction and rehabilitation centers have an important role to play, appropriate and timely educational inputs would be most effective in steering the curious, or those at risk, away from such substances.
In fact, efforts should be made to develop a nationwide, community-based system of prevention that connects stakeholders at every level.
Together, and hand in hand with local organizations, they can deliver solutions that are responsive to the diverse and specific needs of the affected and the susceptible.
You represent the spirit of hope and you will inspire many.
I also extend my felicitations to the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment whose initiative this is - and wish them success in their future endeavours.
Jai Hind.
Ladies and Gentleman,
It gives me immense pleasure to deliver this address on the inauguration of the 16th Indian Cooperative Congress.
Cooperatives or social-enterprises formed by the members, have existed in India since a long time.
Cooperatives are based on the philosophy that in the creation, maintenance and the development of an enterprise, each member is treated as an equal and has equal right and responsibility.
Co-operatives use individualism as a tool and harness their potential for common and joint development, making people and not profit central to their endeavours.
It is in the institutions of co-operatives that the ideals of democracy and common good come to life.
I believe the need for these ideals in our political, social and economic lives has never been stronger.
The history of cooperative movement in India is more than a hundred years old.
Even before formal cooperative structures came into being, the practice of cooperation and cooperative activities were prevalent in India.
Village communities collectively created common assets like village tanks or village forests, pooled seeds and shared their collective harvest.
It was in the latter part of the 19th century that agricultural conditions combined with the absence of institutional financing mechanisms led to the deep indebtedness of the Indian farmer.
In response to this, various Government initiatives were taken - including the Cooperative Credit Societies Act of 1904.
History was then made in October 1946 when two Primary Village Milk Producer Societies were registered.
This was followed by the registration, the same year, of the Khera District Cooperative Milk Producers Union known as Amul.
After India attained Independence in 1947, cooperative development received due recognition and cooperatives were given a central role in the Five Year Plans formulated by the Planning Commission of India particularly for the transformation of the rural economy.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Cooperatives in our country are pivotal institutions for bringing socio-economic development for inclusive growth in rural areas.
The potential of the cooperative approach was perceived by our great national leaders even before India became independent.
Perspectives that could be attained through the cooperative approach were identified after careful thinking, argument and consideration extending over years.
This insight regarding the creative potentialities of Cooperation was one with acute awareness of the value and essentiality of democratic decentralization and Panchayati Raj.
Our Founding Fathers envisaged a full materialization of potential of the cooperative movement in the fields of agricultural, industrial and tertiary development.
Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru who gave decisive impetus to the development of industrial base for the building of a modern India, was equally committed to the promotion of the cooperative movement for achieving the transformation of our economy.
Today, with a net-work of six lakh cooperatives and a membership base of 24 crores, the Indian cooperative movement has proved to be an effective economic instrument for ensuring growth with equity and inclusiveness.
Cooperatives in India have made a visible and significant contribution to the overall economic growth of our economy.
This is especially so in the sectors of agricultural credit, sugar, dairy, textiles, fisheries, distribution of fertilizers and agricultural inputs, storage and marketing.
They have ensured the accrual of a fair share of the benefits of development and growth to our small and marginal farmers.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Recognizing the advantages and its importance world over, United Nations declared 2012 as the International Year of Cooperatives, to increase public awareness about cooperatives and their contributions to socio-economic development and the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
Recently, the Government has taken a big initiative for the cooperatives by enacting the 97th Constitutional Amendment thereby creating an enabling environment for the development of the Cooperatives.
This would enable democratic, autonomous and professional functioning of the cooperatives.
By this amendment the right to form a cooperative society has now become a fundamental right.
The Act has paved the way for development of a stronger cooperative movement.
To take this initiative further to the grass roots level, respective State Governments also need to create enabling environment by amending State laws as and when it is necessary
The cooperative sector today covers about 99% of our villages and 71% of rural households.
Cooperatives are perhaps the best way of reaching out into the vast hinterland of this country where the poor and the marginalized sections live.
Cooperatives have contributed to women empowerment by helping Self Help Groups conduct various income generating activities, adult literacy and cooperative education programmes.
Cooperatives have also had a major role in democratising the access to, what Prof. Amartya Sen has described basic human capabilities such as education, employment, food security, financial security and health-care.
Co-operatives have not only played a meaningful role in improving the socio-economic condition of their members but also served as catalysts for social organization and cohesion.
It has been argued by some that in a liberal and globalized economic order, cooperative societies must wither away.
I completely disagree.
It is my view that the need for cooperatives is greater in current context than it was ever before.
The recent global financial crisis has shown the merits of low-risk customer owned cooperative banking over excessive risk-taking investor owned global financial institutions.
Cooperatives in our country face many challenges and problems.
Their performance across sectors, activities, and regions is variable; hence they need to re-orient themselves by improving their efficiency.
However, while cooperatives do face big challenges, it is also true that they offer a solution to several problems that our economy and community face today.
Co-operatives must receive recognition as an important sector of our economy that serves marginalized and weaker sections.
Top-down approaches should be avoided and local initiatives encouraged.
Co-operatives must be managed by adequately trained and enthusiastic members.
Cooperatives empower people, build capacities and develop capabilities.
They enable members realize their genius.
In a globalized world, where India is advantageously placed to reap demographic dividend, the cooperative sector can play an important role in educating and skilling the youth.
India has perhaps the largest and the most diverse cooperative movement across the globe.
There is a general consensus on the potential of cooperatives in not just economic development, but also, more importantly, the human resource development of a nation.
However, if we look at the contribution cooperatives are making in different parts of the world, we have a fair bit of catching up to do.
We need a renaissance of sorts in the cooperative sector.
Thank you.
The NLUD seeks to create lawyers who are professionally competent, technically sound and socially relevant.
They will not only enter the Bar and the Bench but will also be equipped to address the imperatives of the new millennium and uphold the Constitution of India.
Legal education has undergone a paradigm shift in the last two decades.
NLUD must bridge the gap between the theoretical concepts and practical application.
It must ignite inquiry and encourage curiosity.
The legal profession is regarded a noble profession in every society where the rule of law prevails.
Our freedom struggle sought to wrest from the British colonial masters freedom, basic rights and democracy in a peaceful and non-violent manner using reason, argument, and moral courage all of which are important tools of a good lawyer.
The land on which your university stands has been provided by community.
The nation invests in its universities because students are our future.
You must be ready and willing at all times to represent the powerless and help them obtain justice.
We need an army of smart, committed and idealistic people to give voice to the voiceless and produce tangible change in our society.
I hope all of you gathered here will take up legal aid for the poor as a life long commitment and do your utmost to draw attention to the problems of the disempowered.
However, do not do this demanding or expecting gratitude.
People furious about corruption still remain willing to bribe to expedite their own work.
While demanding strict laws against sexual violence and gender discrimination publicly, there are those who continue to perpetuate the same gender discrimination.
There are many in our country who continue to do so even now.
In the larger scheme of things, their struggle should be your struggle.
Their welfare and happiness provides strength to our democracy and community.
Therefore, be the person who puts in the effort to bring about change and not the one who complains and waits for others to act.
Change is never easy.
It takes patience, faith and hard work.
But, what is important is not to give up.
India has changed more in the last six decades than in the previous six centuries.
I am confident it will change even more in the next ten years than in the previous sixty.
Its driving principle was a compact between state and citizen, a powerful public-private partnership nourished by justice, liberty and equality.
The Constitution represented a second liberation, this time from the stranglehold of traditional inequity in gender, caste, community along with other fetters that had chained us for too long.
Understand our political system, its institutions and processes.
Analyse the choices that were made to build the country into what it is today.
Recognize that intelligent choices will need to be made for enabling this country reach her maximum potential.
Participate in making these choices.
Help policy makers make the right policies.
Do not walk away from issues of national importance.
Be willing to read, learn and formulate views on national issues.
A democracy cannot be healthy without informed participation.
Inform yourself and inform others.
Make the governance of this country your passion.
Pass on what you have learned here, and help others understand their rights as well as responsibilities.
Help the nation create better citizens who are able to access all the opportunities that our country offers.
Lawyers have a duty to fight injustice wherever it exists.
It is lawyers who must lead the change against criminality, poverty, domestic violence, caste‐discrimination and other forms of exploitation.
Victims of such exploitation often do not have the strength or skills to fight it on their own.
If you are asked to support violence, corruption or oppression, have the courage to say no.
If you fear reprisal, remember that breaking an unjust system is about making difficult choices.
It is about enough people daring to make difficult choices and this should begin with you.
Take your duties as a citizen seriously.
As lawyers, you should drive the fulfilment of democratic values and as a group must campaign for positive change in society.
Even as you represent your clients in their individual matters, you must always strive to preserve the rule of law.
Be the guardians of the fundamental rights of our citizens.
They highlight the urgency with which we need to introspect at the erosion of values and our repeated failure to ensure safety and security of our women and children.
There is need for us in India to reset our moral compass.
We must collectively ensure the dignity and respect for women at all times.
Universities like NLUD must take the lead in meeting contemporary moral challenges and ensuring that nine essential civilizational values of love for motherland; performance of duty; compassion for all; tolerance for pluralism; respect for women; honesty in life; self-restraint in conduct, responsibility in action and discipline are fully entrenched in the young minds.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
This is a long awaited and proud moment for all the distinguished students who have received degrees.
I offer my felicitations and congratulations to the graduates and those who have received awards for meritorious work and the faculty who have nurtured them.
They suffer from geographical and cultural seclusion, and inadequate physical infrastructure.
This results in the low capacity of the tribal economy to meaningfully absorb funds, including institutional finance.
Tribal communities have also been found to lag behind the general population in maternal and child mortality, size of agricultural holdings, and access to education.
The Indira Gandhi National Tribal University is an important instrument to fulfill the unmet need for greater access to education for the tribal communities.
I am happy to know that right from the beginning, the strength of the students belonging to the Scheduled Tribes category in this University has been nearly 46 per cent.
I also further happy that almost 40 per cent of the student community comprises girls.
I am pleased to know that the University has opened its Regional Campus at Manipur, which is home to substantial tribal population.
I am told that graduates from the Regional Centre are also receiving their degrees today.
That the teachers of this University come from 18 states of India, reflects its National character.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Educated women will impart not only good moral values to her children but will also strengthen the moral fabric of society at large.
If the right education and correct moral values can be imparted from a very impressionable age, we will surely be able to develop an individual with a balanced frame of mind who contributes to the society in a constructive manner.
The rising incidents of crime against women and children call for effective measures to ensure their safety, security and dignity.
It also underlines an immediate need to arrest the moral decline in our society.
Our universities must take the lead in meeting the contemporary moral challenges and ensuring that our civilizational values of love for motherland; performance of duty; compassion for all; tolerance for pluralism; respect for women and elderly; truth and honesty in life; discipline and self-restraint in conduct, and responsibility in action are fully entrenched in the young minds.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Tribals have been at the forefront of conservation of nature and there is a strong mutually beneficial relationship between tribals and forests.
However, the rights of tribals over traditional land holdings in the forests have often come under dispute.
Diminishing access to natural resources has led to impoverishment of tribals often reducing them to the status of migrant labour.
In many instances, inadequate rehabilitation of displaced tribals compounds their woes making them asset-less and unemployed.
There is urgent need for sustained and focused attention by state and central Governments on the protection of rights and enhancement of welfare of the tribals.
The fruits of development must reach the most under privileged communities of India.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The two must go hand in hand.
The safety and security of our citizens in tribal areas must be ensured.
They must be enabled to become equal participants in the nation building process.
At the same time, the nation as a whole must make clear that incidents such as the recent attack by Maoists in Chhattisgarh on a convoy of vehicles leading to heavy loss of life is not at all acceptable.
Violence has no place whatsoever in our democratic polity.
Our nation will neither be overawed nor intimidated by such efforts to terrorize the public.
Permit me to use this occasion to express my deepest condolences to the families of those killed in the incident once again and offer my prayers for the speedy recovery of those injured in the incident.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The Government of India has adopted several measures for the development of the tribal population.
It has emphasized rapid educational development to bring tribals into the mainstream of the population.
But, desired change in the social and economic conditions of tribals is still slow.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Our strategy of high economic growth aims at overcoming poverty and ensuring development for all.
We have to make economic growth relevant for our people, especially those at the bottom of the socio-economic pyramid.
Distributive justice, as a higher goal of democratic polity, can be achieved only through a sound education system.
We must take advantage of this demographic dividend, but for that, our youth must be qualified and trained to participate in national progress.
They must be prepared through quality higher education and vocational training.
We have to effect innovative changes in the way education is imparted in our institutes of higher learning.
A culture of excellence must be inculcated in them.
There must be greater use of technology models like e-classrooms that can enable information and knowledge sharing by wider dispersal of lectures overcoming distance.
It can address the challenges of quantity, quality, accessibility and faculty shortage.
This, along with economic difficulty, effectively denies many bright students from pursuing higher studies.
Its consequences are disturbing.
Greater access to higher education, especially in remote areas, is the need of the hour.
It will entail not only setting up institutions and gearing up the capacity of existing ones, but also making increased use of technology solutions and student aid programmes to make it affordable for meritorious students belonging to economically difficult background.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am confident of this University taking every possible step to realize her vision and providing a strong impetus for quality higher education and research for the tribal population and giving a new direction to our tribal youth.
The strength of this University lies in its students.
It must invest adequately in their academic, moral and personal development.
Always move ahead with an open mind to widen your horizons and reach new heights.
All challenges can be overcome if you work with sincerity and dedication, and maintain an inner poise.
I wish you all the best in life and career.
I take this opportunity of congratulating the management and all the stakeholders who have nurtured this university.
Thank you.
Harmonious co-existence among various faiths and communities is not an ideal anymore but an absolute imperative today.
In his first speech in Chicago on 11th September, 1893, the Swami had a very significant message - which humanity can ignore only at its peril.
I like to refer to the following words from his speech:
They have filled the earth with violence, drenched it often and often with human blood, destroyed civilisation, and sent whole nations to despair.
Swamiji was uncompromisingly opposed to discrimination, deprivation and injustice on the grounds of caste, class and gender.
According to him, the mismatch between the lofty ideals of Vedanta and the disgraceful apathy for the human condition in our society were simply unacceptable.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I fondly remember my visit to DIAT in 2006 as Raksha Mantri.
Established in 1952, DIAT became a deemed university in 2000.
Today, it is a unique academic institution for research-oriented education and for carrying out fundamental and exploratory research in advanced defence technologies.
It is the culmination of a very important phase in the life of an individual.
I congratulate all the students and researchers who have received their degrees today.
Along with the rights they enjoy in a democracy, they also have great responsibilities towards the nation.
Our country desires a stable and rule-based international system.
It is a matter of deep concern that the international security environment continues to decline.
An increased use of science and technology in defence preparedness is a necessity today.
There is need for domain knowledge, and to develop capabilities and strengthen systems through innovation.
Policy making should be proactive to identify problems, highlight trends, develop scenarios, and recommend policy options, so as to avert any crisis.
We must, therefore, have a pool of institutions in our country dedicated to raising the technological capabilities of our defence systems and expanding the knowledge frontier on issues of defence and security.
DIAT, as a specialized defence research and technology university, has a crucial role to generate state-of-art knowledge to fulfill the needs of our defence establishment.
Our future growth will depend increasingly on the knowledge economy.
We are short of good quality institutions to meet the increasing demand.
As per a survey, none of our academic institutions finds a place amongst the top two hundred universities in the world.
They became the colossus of the renowned Indian higher education system before they petered out by the beginning of the 13th Century AD.
Today, our universities are no where in the top global rankings.
We must effect innovative changes to develop our universities into world class institutions.
A culture of excellence should be ushered in by allowing adequate flexibility in different aspects of academic management.
Our universities should make greater use of e-education to address the problems of accessibility, quality and faculty shortage.
Through e-classrooms, it is possible to transmit important lectures to students in different locations.
We need a critical mass of experts in every field whose efforts could be networked to deliver greater benefits.
The National Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology is an important initiative in this direction.
For that, it is important to provide training in life skills such as self-awareness, empathy, creative thinking, problem-solving, effective communication, inter-personal relationship, and stress and emotion management.
These skills should find due place in our academic curriculum and our institutes must have the requisite expertise to impart them.
A sound knowledge base will determine our economic strength, energy security and defence preparedness.
A culture of innovation is required for that, which is sadly lacking in our country.
Only forty two thousand patent applications were filed in India in 2011.
This number is twelve times more in China and US.
We have the capability to innovate but we lack the systems that can encourage us to do so.
To develop research expertise in key areas, we must have a flexible system to attract Indian scientists and technologists working abroad to work on short-term projects in our country.
We must strengthen measures such as inter-disciplinary and inter-university research partnerships, research fellowships and industry incubation parks.
I am happy to note that DIAT has academic and research collaboration with a number of institutions in our country and abroad.
This should have meaning for the common man.
There are grass root innovations that can be developed into viable products.
For that, our universities and research institutions in collaboration with the corporate sector should provide technological mentoring.
In a Conference of the Vice Chancellors of Central Universities held this year, a recommendation was made to set up Innovators Clubs in the Central Universities to facilitate interaction between the teaching and student communities and grassroots innovators.
Recently, I had the occasion to open such clubs at two Central Universities in Uttar Pradesh and Assam.
In innovation exhibitions organized by these universities and the Nagaland University, I was happy to witness the ingenuity of our young innovators.
I invite all to join this festival of innovations in our country.
It has complemented the efforts of the Defence Research and Development Organization by carrying out research leading to development of new technology.
I compliment Raksha Mantri for supporting this initiative wholeheartedly keeping in view the long term benefits to our country.
I am confident that this University will rank high in its class globally and contribute in a big way to our self reliance in defence science and technology.
You will have the opportunity to learn at every stage of your life.
You must have an open mind for that.
You must overcome challenges with sincerity, poise, dedication and hard work.
I wish you all the best in life and career.
I compliment the Himachal Pradesh Government for their foresight in facilitating the establishment of this higher educational institute in the State.
I hope this University will fulfill the unmet need for higher education in this region.
The recent increase in cases of brutal assault on women and children has shaken the collective conscience of our nation.
These unfortunate incidents call for effective measures for their safety and security.
It also underscores urgency for us to introspect and find solutions to arrest the erosion of values in our society.
Our educational institutions beginning from schools should take the lead in meeting the moral challenges of our times and ensure that our civilizational values of love for motherland; performance of duty; compassion for all; tolerance for pluralism; respect for women and elderly; truth and honesty in life; discipline and self-restraint in conduct, and responsibility in action are fully entrenched in the young minds.
This demographic dividend is for our taking, but for that, our youth must be qualified and trained to participate in national progress.
Our economic progress will rely increasingly on the knowledge economy.
It is crucial that the knowledge-based sectors like information technology, bio-technology, architecture, management, accountancy and law are equipped with competent personnel.
I am hopeful that this University will be able to set new benchmarks in professional education.
The total number of students enrolled in this sector was 2.6 crore at the end of the Eleventh Plan period.
This number is projected to increase to 3.6 crore at the end of the Twelfth Plan period.
We have over six hundred fifty degree awarding institutions and over thirty three thousand colleges.
But we are short of good quality academic institutions, on account of which, many bright students prefer going abroad for higher studies.
For about eighteen hundred years in history, Indian universities had dominated the world education system.
Takshashila was a global university established in the 6th Century BC.
Renowned personalities like Chandragupta Maurya, Chanakya, Panini, St. Thomas, Faxian, Charaka and Democritus came to this University.
There were other famed universities like Nalanda, Vikramashila, Valabhi, Somapura and Odantapuri that added to the outstanding Indian higher education system.
These universities functioned efficiently as a system before the decline set in the 13th Century AD.
But for that, we have to make innovative changes in the way our institutes of higher learning are administered and education in them rendered.
We must allow adequate flexibility in different aspects of academic management.
There is a need to instill a culture of excellence in them.
Every university should identify at least one department that can be made into a Centre of Excellence.
This is very low compared to Germany where it is 21 per cent, and US where it is 34 per cent.
There is an urgent need to increase accessibility.
This will not only improve the enrolment rate in higher education but also enhance of quality of graduates produced by the system.
The National Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology is an important initiative for facilitating information and knowledge sharing.
It is possible to share important lectures through e-classrooms with students studying in far off locations.
A highly competitive world calls for holistic development of an individual.
It is, therefore, necessary to infuse the students with life skills like self-awareness, empathy, creative thinking, problem-solving, effective communication, inter-personal relationship, and stress and emotion management.
Our educational institutions should include such skills training in its course curriculum and also develop expertise to impart them.
International experience shows private sector and Alumni participation being behind the success of top universities like Harvard, Yale and Stanford.
Even today, private institutions account for nearly 60 per cent of the total enrolment in our country but there is a need for better management to improve service delivery, ensure minimum benchmark and promote excellence.
We must take immediate steps to fill up the large number of vacant faculty positions.
We must also use technology-based solutions to tide over this crisis.
They can make their students appreciate a subject from a wider perspective and encourage them to question their own knowledge.
By their conduct and life example, they can inspire their students to imbibe correct values.
As per an international survey, only 3 amongst the 100 most innovative companies in the world are Indian companies.
Research as an academic programme accounts for less than 0.4 per cent of our higher education student population.
The drive for innovation is weak in our country as we lack the systems that encourage and generate innovation.
There is a need to strengthen the system of research fellowships, inter-disciplinary and inter-university research collaborations and industry incubation parks.
We must attract Indian scientists and technologists working abroad to come to India for short-term assignments.
Our drive towards innovation should benefit those at the bottom of the socio-economic pyramid.
There are many grassroots innovations that require technological and commercial assistance for converting them into viable products.
The higher education and industry sectors should mentor such initiatives.
To deliberate on the changes necessary in our higher education system, a Conference of Vice Chancellors of Central Universities was held this year.
A recommendation was made for setting up Innovators Clubs in the Central Universities to facilitate interaction between the teaching and student communities and grassroots innovators.
Recently, I had the chance to open such clubs in two Central Universities in Uttar Pradesh and Assam.
I also attended innovation exhibitions organized in these universities and in the Nagaland University, and was happy to see the innovations of our young people.
I call upon this University to take such an initiative in its formative years so as to build a strong innovation culture.
I am told that this University has started academic disciplines in the fields of technology, architecture, management and law.
It has envisaged expanding their programmes to include courses of contemporary relevance like health science, indology, mass communication and journalism.
I am confident of this University providing a strong impetus to the growth of professional education in our country.
I dedicate this University to our youth and nation.
I once again congratulate all those involved in setting up this University and giving shape to its academic programmes.
I am extremely happy to be here in Shimla to deliver the First Rabindranath Tagore Memorial Lecture.
Nearly five decades ago, my predecessor Dr Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan inaugurated the Indian Institute of Advanced Study (IIAS).
He envisaged it to be a place where scholars could pursue the larger questions of life and thought; where, in fellowship, a body of ideas would emerge, and be debated, so that the intellectual fabric of this great nation would be enriched.
Dr Radhakrishnan was a man of ideas.
He valued them and drew upon authors and texts, from both the East and the West, to talk about the human personality and its destiny.
Today, nearly fifty years later, I have the privilege to inaugurate, in this campus, and within the precincts of the Indian Institute of Advanced Study, the Tagore Centre for the Study of Culture and Civilization.
As Chairman of the National Implementation Committee to mark 150th Birth Anniversary of Tagore, I had opportunity to examine the proposal for this Centre.
I was enthused by its conception and endorsed the idea that the IIAS was the appropriate institutional home for the new Centre.
There was a clear affinity between the IIAS and the vision outlined in the proposal for the proposed Tagore Centre which would be dedicated to celebrating the vision of Gurudev.
The new Centre would allow for intellectual excursions into the human condition by exploring, in addition to his written work, the new idioms of art, poetry, fiction, drama, and music that he developed in the vast body of his work.
It will also seek to define a space within the IIAS where the sensibility of the poet, the creativity of the artist, the vision of the seer, the anxieties of the educationist, the questions of the philosopher, and the hopes of the cosmopolitan would be examined.
I am confident it will carry out the above task in conversation with other writers, thinkers, poets, and artists from across the world.
Tagore was a renaissance man and such men are found rarely in history.
In their personality, they capture not just the times they live in but also the complex questions of the human mind, the questions that transcend locations and are pertinent for all communities across the world.
The status of morals in our public domain, or rather the nature of our public morals, and the forces that undermine and weaken them has been a matter of concern for me for some time now.
This process, aided by the wonderful progress in science, is assuming gigantic proportions and power, obscuring the human side under the shadow of the soulless organization.
There is, not enough discussion among scholars in the humanities and the social sciences in India on the drivers and implications of this consumerist society.
In addition to its consequences for climate change, and the pressures on natural resources that it entails, I am concerned with its impact on our social and cultural institutions.
This brings me to the second passage which conveys my own aspiration for India.
India cannot be diffident about this role.
The time has come for us to draw from this intellectual heritage the insights of thought and of practice that the world needs to understand.
I strongly believe that India can illumine this world with a brightness that is almost magical and I believe that the Indian Institute of Advanced Study, and its Tagore Centre, can be at the forefront of this exercise.
To quote Gurudev from a letter to C.F Andrews on 13 March 1921.
Men of feeble faith will say that India requires to be strong and rich before she can raise her voice for the sake of the whole world.
But I refuse to believe it.
I believe that the requirement of our times is for intellectuals to engage with moral issues and provide guidance to the people.
I am troubled by a sense of moral drift that has beset us and begun to dominate our public lives.
We do not seem to have exemplars, such as Tagore, today from whom to learn.
They say a society needs its exemplars because they serve as the moral compass in uncertain times.
We are going through troubled times.
In such a phase of moral uncertainty, we should go back to great minds such as Tagore to see what direction he has to offer us.
Tagore was referred to as the sage of Calcutta.
He was regarded as the Kaviguru of Bengal.
Poets see more deeply what most of us cannot see.
They see the true meaning of things around us and of life and society.
Tagore was specially gifted in seeing beyond and he made these insights available to us in many forms, through his music, painting, theatre, poetry and prose.
The new Tagore Centre will I hope have many grateful Kalidasas.
Convocation day marks the completion of an extremely important phase in the life of an individual.
I congratulate all the students who have received their degrees today.
Our youth must understand that being in a democracy, it not only enjoys rights but also carry responsibilities.
It is gratifying to note that this University is giving a serious thought to the introduction of a choice-based credit system that will act as a medium for knowledge convergence.
To strive towards greater intellectual and socially relevant learning, this University has prepared a Vision 2020 document.
I am confident that the entire Himachal Pradesh University community will continue to work with dedication and commitment to take it to greater heights.
The rising incidents of crime against women and children call for effective measures to ensure their safety and security.
It also underlines an immediate need to arrest the moral decline in our society.
We must find answers for reversing the degradation of values.
Our universities have the capability to shape the minds of the youth.
These temples of higher learning must act as guides in meeting the contemporary moral challenges and ensure that our civilizational values of love for motherland; performance of duty; compassion for all; tolerance for pluralism; respect for women and elderly; truth and honesty in life; discipline and self-restraint in conduct, and responsibility in action are fully entrenched in the young minds.
Our strategy of high economic growth is to overcome poverty and ensure development for all.
We have to make economic growth relevant for our people, especially those at the bottom of the socio-economic pyramid.
Distributive justice, as a higher goal of democratic polity, can be achieved only through a sound education system.
To gain from this transition, our youth must be prepared through quality higher education and vocational training.
The higher education infrastructure in our country comprises over 650 degree awarding institutions and over 33,000 colleges.
Despite this, we are short of good quality institutions to meet the increasing demand.
We need quality education to be imparted to the manpower of tomorrow.
With focus on efficient management, these ancient universities became the colossus of the famed Indian higher education system.
But today, our universities are no where in the top global rankings.
For that, we must strengthen our drive to effect innovative changes to develop our universities into world class academic institutions.
A culture of excellence should be promoted by allowing adequate flexibility in different aspects of academic management.
Our colleges enrol 87 per cent of the higher education students.
The affiliating universities should, therefore, take utmost care in monitoring and guiding these colleges on curricula and evaluation.
Its consequences are disturbing.
Compared to this, it is 21 per cent in Germany and 34 per cent in the US.
Accessibility and affordability are necessary steps for inclusion.
To make higher education affordable for meritorious students belonging to socio-economically difficult backgrounds, measures like scholarships, student loans and self-help schemes are necessary.
For that, they must be equipped with life skills such as self-awareness, empathy, creative thinking, problem-solving, effective communication, inter-personal relationship, and stress and emotion management.
These skills are important for a healthy development of an individual, and should find due place in our academic curriculum.
Our higher education institutions are short of good faculty.
This may hamper our efforts at quality improvement.
Hence, we must place top priority in filling up vacancies and also building capacity in our teachers.
Through words, actions and deeds, such teachers inspire the students and elevate them to a higher level of performance and thinking.
They enable their students to appreciate a subject from a wider perspective.
They help to inculcate good values in their students.
Our educational institutions must recognize such inspired teachers and encourage them to share their knowledge, wisdom and philosophy with larger number of students.
China and the US are at the forefront of innovation with over 5 lakh patent applications each, filed in 2011.
India, with only 42,000 patent applications, lags behind these leaders.
We lack the systems to encourage and generate innovation.
We must strengthen measures such as inter-disciplinary and inter-university research partnerships, research fellowships and industry incubation parks.
We must develop key research expertise.
We must put in place a system to attract Indian researchers working abroad to work on short-term projects in our country.
This should carry meaning for the common man.
There are grass root innovations that require technological and commercial mentoring for developing them into viable products.
In a Conference of the Vice Chancellors of Central Universities held this year, a recommendation was made to set up Innovators Clubs in the Central Universities to facilitate interaction between the teaching and student communities and grassroots innovators.
Recently, I had the occasion to open such clubs at two Central Universities in Uttar Pradesh and Assam.
In innovation exhibitions organized by these universities and the Nagaland University, I was pleased to see the technologies that have been developed by the grassroots innovators.
I invite you to join this festival of innovations in our country.
I wish you all the best in life and career.
It is a great pleasure to be amongst the distinguished literary personalities present here today.
I recognize among you many friends and I am delighted to see you present on this occasion.
In conferring the 47th Bharatiya Jnanpith Award for the year 2011 on Dr. Pratibha Ray, we honour an eminent Oriya litterateur, fiction writer, and educationist for her outstanding contribution to the enrichment of Indian literature.
In another literary vein, her research on the social and economic aspects of remote societies of Orissa is particularly note worthy.
She has been appreciated for the authentic reality in her fictional works.
She has, nevertheless, remained consistently devoted, in her writing, to reality and humanity, classic values and human dignity.
Her works have been translated into a number of Indian languages.
This would educate our young about distant regions that they may not be aware of - and make them more sensitive to the social, religious and cultural diversities of our country.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the Bharatiya Jnanpith Trust founded by the Sahu Jain family.
Initiatives like these are commendable as they support the role of the State in facilitating and promoting our cultural heritage.
The blossoming of Indian literary talent owes much to the efforts of such philanthropists and patrons of the arts.
I congratulate and compliment the Trustees for their sustained support, over five decades, to the development of Indian literature.
It gives me immense pleasure to be here today for the third Convocation of Nagaland University, a premier centre of higher learning in the North Eastern Region.
I am privileged to be in this University, whose foundation was laid in 1987 by our former Prime Minister, Late Shri Rajiv Gandhi.
Ever since its establishment, Nagaland University has made great strides in various fields of teaching and research.
By imparting quality education to students from this region, it has acted as a centre of empowerment of people.
I am happy to note that this University has a Centre for Gandhian Studies and Research to impart Gandhian values to its students.
I am happy to confer today the Honorary Degrees on Dr. Jamir and Professor Mrinal Miri, another renowned personality, for their outstanding contribution to the advancement of education in the State.
Nagaland is an important State of our country.
It has made substantial progress in human development, with literacy and infant mortality rates better than the national average.
Its indigenous art forms, culture and tradition are a matter of immense pride.
Its rich natural resource and gifted and industrious people are an asset for the State and the country.
Education is a powerful tool for social thinking and transformation.
The recent increase in cases of brutal assault on women and children has shaken the collective conscience of our nation.
These unfortunate incidents underscore the urgency for us to introspect at the erosion of values and to devise effective measures for the safety and security of our women and children.
We must identify the causes of moral decline in our society.
Our universities and academic institutions must take the lead to meet the moral challenge of our times and ensure that our civilizational values of love for motherland; performance of duty; compassion for all; tolerance for pluralism; respect for women and elderly; truth and honesty in life; discipline and self-restraint in conduct, and responsibility in action are fully entrenched in the young minds.
Our economic growth will rely increasingly on the knowledge economy.
Thus, a sound higher education system in our country is an imperative.
The higher education system in India rests on the three pillars of quality, affordability and accessibility.
During the Eleventh Five Year Plan period, 65 new Central Institutions, including 21 Central Universities, were established.
Except for one state, there is at least one Central University in every state of the country.
Despite this, the problems of quantity and quality persist.
There are more than 2 lakh Indian students studying abroad, including US and UK.
We should be able to draw our students to seek higher education in their own country.
We can revive our lost glory.
We have the capability to take at least a few of our academic institutions into the global top league.
But for that, we have to change the way education is imparted in our higher educational institutions.
A culture of excellence should be embedded in our thought process.
Every university should identify one department that can be developed into a Centre of Excellence.
I call upon the Central universities to take the lead in this transformation.
To effect innovative changes to strengthen the higher education sector, a conference of the Vice Chancellors of Central Universities was organized in the Rashtrapati Bhavan in February this year.
The conclusions arrived at the Conference on the measures required for effecting changes in the education system are being worked upon by the Ministry of Human Resource Development.
I hope that we will achieve substantial progress in a short span of time.
Compared to this, it is 21 per cent in Germany and 34 per cent in the US.
This effectively denies many good students the opportunity to acquire higher education.
We have to increase accessibility in higher education as a means to achieve greater inclusion.
Innovative teaching methodologies should be adopted by our universities by increasing the use of technology.
The infrastructure of the National Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology has great potential to facilitate collaborative information sharing.
Transmission of important lectures to students studying in institutions situated far off from the urban centres is possible now.
The success of inclusion in higher education also depends on affordability.
Meritorious students from difficult socio-economic background should be assisted to pursue higher education by measures like scholarships, student loans and self-help schemes.
Shortage of faculty has hampered our efforts at improving the standards of education.
In Central Universities, vacancy is about 38 per cent.
Immediate steps should be taken to fill up the vacancies.
To tide over this crisis, we must also resort to technology solutions such as e-classrooms.
Our teachers must possess the latest information and knowledge so that they can give their students the best education.
The refresher programmes organized by the Academic Staff Colleges should be reviewed more frequently to retain their relevance to contemporary teaching.
India lags behind some of the major economies in innovation.
Though Indians comprise one-sixth of the world population, only one in 50 patent applications in the world are filed in India.
We have abundant manpower whose capacity should be developed by a sustained programme of education and training.
But more importantly, we should revamp the systems to encourage and generate innovation.
Our academic environment must be conducive for promotion of research.
Increasing the number of research fellowships, supporting inter-disciplinary and inter-university research partnerships and establishing industry incubation parks would help in this direction.
Our system must be suited to attract Indian scientists and technologists working abroad to return and work on short-term assignments.
This decade is the decade of innovation.
It should benefit the common man.
There are grass root innovations that require technical and commercial assistance for converting them into economically viable products.
Our Universities and Industry should mentor such initiatives.
In the Conference of Vice Chancellors of Central Universities held this year, a recommendation was made to set up Innovators Clubs in the Central Universities to facilitate interaction between the teaching and student communities and grassroots innovators.
Recently, I had the opportunity to open such clubs at the Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow and Assam University, Silchar.
I was happy to see the innovations that have been made by the young people.
I am sure this initiative will soon reach all the other Central Universities.
I congratulate all the students who are getting their degrees today.
Please remember that learning is a never ending process.
At every stage of life, there will be opportunities to learn.
Keep an open mind and equip yourself to face the challenges of life with poise, sincerity and courage.
At the outset, I extend my greetings on the festive occasion of the thirteenth annual convocation of Assam University.
I take this opportunity to congratulate all the awardees of medals, various degrees and diplomas and wish them a very bright future.
As the Visitor of the university, I thank the awardees of Honoris Causa for accepting our request and making us proud of our association with them.
Education is an important driver of social change and progress.
The increase in cases of crime against women and children calls for effective steps to ensure their safety and security.
It also underscores the need for our society to introspect and find ways to arrest the moral decline.
It is for our universities and other institutes of higher learning to initiate a movement to meet the moral challenges and ensure that our civilizational values of compassion for all; love for country; tolerance for pluralism; respect for women; truth and honesty in personal life; discipline and self-restraint in conduct, and responsibility in action are instilled in the minds of our youth.
Education plays a fundamental role in the development of a society and nation.
True empowerment can be attained only with knowledge.
If our country has to continue on its path of higher growth, then the relentless pursuit of higher educational standards is an indispensable requirement for its achievement.
We have made remarkable progress in this direction.
Except for one State, today there is now at least one Central University in every state of our country.
This phenomenal growth is still inadequate to cater to the demand for the higher education in the country.
The education sector is today confronted by problems relating to both quantity and quality.
It may be heartening that the density of educational institutions in India has increased from 10 to 14 institutions per 1,000 square kilometers during the Eleventh Plan period.
But it is disheartening that many places in our country do not have higher educational institutions that are within the reach of aspiring students.
Looking into the challenges of the higher education system in India, we had organized a conference of the Vice Chancellors of the Central Universities in Rashtrapati Bhavan in February of this year.
The Prime Minster, the Human Resource Development Minister and the Vice Chancellors were agreed on the urgent need to address the challenges that we are facing in the sector.
It is gratifying to note that the Ministry of Human Resource Development has started the implementation of the decisions taken in right earnest.
India has the second largest higher education system in the world, but the gross enrolment in the country in 2010 was only about 19 per cent, which is much below the world average of 29 per cent.
Adding to the woes is the low enrolment rate of the disadvantaged sections which is much below the national average.
To make education accessible to more students, our efforts must be directed at bringing higher education closer to our population to particularly those in remote corners of the country.
We must remove the imbalances in the reach of higher education across states, regions and sections of society.
Knowledge pursuit has many dimensions.
It brings Gender equity as a result of access and reach.
I am happy that the North-East has now focused its attention on education for women.
A large of number of North-Eastern girls are now pursuing education in major cities of India and are also employed in metropolitan cities.
In the developed countries, universities are converting themselves into virtual and meta universities permitting free movement of the academic fraternity, both students and academia, from one institution to another.
Flexibility in procedure and rigour in quality have made them attract large numbers of students from different parts of the globe.
They are truly world class.
We must remember that once we had world class universities in Nalanda and Takshashila.
Therefore, the dream of creating world class universities in India is an achievable aspiration.
India with a strong scientific and technical manpower has an opportunity to become a major knowledge power in the years to come.
To make this dream a reality, we have to invest in research and development.
Best investment that a Nation could make is in her youth power.
To capitalize the advantages of large demographic dividend and huge scientific talent pool, we have announced the Science, Technology and Innovation Policy, 2013.
We have to recognize innovation and bring it closer to the masses.
This decade is the decade of innovation.
Innovation will carry meaning only if it translates into benefits for those at the bottom of the socio-economic pyramid.
In the Conference of Vice Chancellors of Central Universities held this year, a recommendation was made to set up Innovators Clubs in the Central Universities to facilitate interaction between the teaching and student communities and grassroots innovators.
Recently, I had the opportunity to open such a club at the Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow.
I was happy to see the innovations that have been made by the young people.
Today, I am happy that Assam University, Silchar, has also set up the innovation club and organized an exhibition of innovators.
I will also be meeting the inspired teachers identified by the university.
I would like to compliment the Vice Chancellor and his team for taking this initiative and being one of the first few central universities to put these elements is place.
I hope that this will provide a platform for innovation in this region so that no innovation will go unnoticed and unexploited.
The North-Eastern part of the country has been always very dear to me.
This region has a potential to excel in the field of higher education.
As the Visitor of Assam University, I would like to see Assam University taking lead in imparting high quality education and become a role model in higher education segment.
Convocation is a special occasion in the life of a university and the students.
It marks the culmination of a phase of learning.
It gives me great pleasure to be here once again in Nagaland.
The people of the Northeast are known for their rich cultural traditions and their hearty hospitality.
I must say that Nagaland in particular best exemplifies these admirable traits and I thank the Government and the people of Nagaland for according me and my family such a warm welcome.
During this brief visit of mine to your beautiful state, I will have the opportunity to attend the 3rd Convocation of the Nagaland University at Lumami on the 15th of May 2013.
I am looking forward to the Convocation and to meeting with the best of Naga minds.
It is the interest of Young India that I am particularly keen to pursue and I wish to be assured that they inherit a future India that is developed and progressive in all fields.
Every Indian must be guaranteed that they have a dream which is attainable and achievable be they from Kerala or Kohima.
These must be based on equitable sharing of developmental benefits, which in turn springs from inclusive growth.
These goals remain targets in many areas that I have visited but here I am thus reminded of the Poet Robert Frost whom I quote:
But I have promises to keep,
The onus is indeed on us, the privileged gathered here today to ensure that Nagaland has its rightful place in our great nation.
As the state of Nagaland enters the threshold of its 50th Anniversary, it is time for our leaders to introspect.
The forthcoming Jubilee year should be one wherein all of us put our minds together, to rededicate ourselves to nation building, to work towards the welfare of the least of our peoples and to reorient our goals to match with those of the nation at large.
Fifty years is a long enough time for the state to achieve a clear consciousness and self confidence on itself, to think outwards and to reach out to others.
To achieve greater heights, the time for broader thinking and the realigning of our goalposts further out, must be done.
The aim for the next fifty years should be for a fully developed Nagaland wherein the young people are able to find here the same avenues as in the rest of the country.
But along with this comes the duties and responsibilities of our citizens.
To meet these goals and to ensure that Nagaland is an equal and contributing partner to nation-building, the admirable Naga pride must also be matched with hardwork and sacrifice.
Peace and security are essential to any development and I appeal to all citizens to work towards it.
Two sides of the coin essential for human progress and growth.
Coupled with this is the need for the Nagas to reach out to the other states.
I am pleased to know that so many young people from the northeast are working so well in the fields of hospitality and IT in many major cities in our country.
I call upon the young to also pursue the whole world as your footstool.
I urge the citizens of the northeast bordering international borders to actively seek business and industry in our neigbouring countries and be a part of the great Indian diaspora, who are today transforming lives in our country and also the countries that they are naturalized in.
I urge you to be global citizens in your work and you must begin with your outlook.
Nagaland is rich in natural beauty.
Naga people have always been known for their festivals and for their love of music and dance.
You have deep respect for your colourful traditions.
Certainly, this is an appropriate slogan for a people who greatly merit their feasts.
I will indeed go back with fond memories.
Thank You.
Jai Hind.
The National Florence Nightingale Awards are a befitting recognition of the extraordinary services rendered by nurses who have served the sick and the ailing, with compassion, patience and courage.
May 12 marks the birth anniversary of Florence Nightingale who more than a century ago, established the first Institution to train nurses.
Today nursing has evolved into a modern medical profession with wealth of skills and professional knowledge.
Nurses form a large and critical part of the health workforce who are the backbone of the healthcare system.
As keen facilitators of the healthcare, they are the pivot in the Hospital-Doctor-Patient paradigm.
Whether it is preventive care, home care or hospital care, nurses are an indispensable part of the healthcare.
They have developed nursing into a noble specialisation and have themselves become synonymous with competence and unparalleled commitment.
Government of India, in its 12th Five Year Plan, has set the goal of health for all.
With the expansion of our medical infrastructure and its coverage, there will be an increased demand for nursing staff.
This can be addressed by augmenting capacities in existing institutions and by opening many more nursing schools.
In doing so, they have brought focus to the Millennium Development Goals related to improving maternal health, reducing child mortality and combating HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases.
Our Government has a number of well-established schemes in these areas.
The time has come to effectively utilise the services of Nurses in Public Health Services beyond their traditional domain of hospitals and dispensaries.
The skills of our Nurses can be used to great advantage in improving health services in rural areas where there are no doctors.
I am confident, in times to come, nursing profession will attain greater recognition and they will be empowered with more responsibilities, competencies and better facilities for improving the health services.
I am sure, this noble profession will continue to attract competent and dedicated young men and women who will serve their communities with love and compassion.
While congratulating recipients of these awards today, I wish to thank the entire nursing fraternity in our country for their dedication and service to the nation.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
It is indeed a privilege for me to be present here along with you to participate in the National Technology Day 2013 function.
I take this opportunity to extend my greetings and gratitude to our scientists, engineers and technologists whose sincere endeavour, untiring commitment and focused vision helped us achieve the status of Nation with high technological capability despite many odds.
Globalization has rewritten the rules of business.
Only the most competitive and resilient companies can expect to survive in the fiercely global market.
We must make sure we have the capacity to compete, to innovate and to deliver on time.
If our systems are strong and robust, the world will respect us and be willing to work with us.
Innovation is increasingly recognized as the currency of the future.
It lends a competitive edge to business, and provides solution for effective governance.
It is therefore not surprising that governments around the world are making a concerted effort to encourage innovation.
The decade 2010-20 has been declared in India as the decade of innovation.
We have formulated the Science, Technology and Innovation Policy this year, aimed at an innovation-led development.
This policy calls for an eco-system for innovation activity to thrive in our country.
It portrays a need to encourage and recognize innovators, including grass root innovators who by their sheer brilliance have added value to processes to the benefit of the common man.
This policy also addresses the need to right-size our research and development system.
India spends only 0.9 per cent of GDP on research and development, which is much below that of China, UK and Israel.
We should step up our expenditure on research to pursue innovation in a big way.
The future prosperity of India in the new knowledge economy will increasingly depend on its ability to generate new ideas, processes and solutions.
The process of innovation shall convert knowledge into social good and economic wealth.
In a globally competitive world, India has to unleash its innovation potential to increase capacity, productivity, efficiency and inclusive growth.
And for it to happen, the spirit of innovation has to permeate all sectors of the economy from universities, businesses and government, to people at all levels.
India today has a number of strengths.
With a strong research and development base and academic talent, it has the potential to become a leading innovation player in certain key economic sectors such as biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, automotive components, information technology, software, and IT-enabled services.
However, India has around 300 million of its citizens living below the poverty line.
I believe that India can meet the challenges of sustainable inclusive growth by using innovation and technology as key drivers and enablers of growth.
The Indian innovation strategy, therefore, has to be different.
It should focus on generating ideas that promote inclusive growth and benefit people at the bottom of the socio-economic pyramid.
To conceive a sustainable growth strategy, we must focus on inclusive innovation.
We have taken steps to create an innovation eco-system.
It will encourage efforts to design solutions that create livelihood opportunities and skill development for the poor.
Twenty innovation clusters are being set up in the country to take the inclusive innovation agenda forward.
I am told that an India Innovation web portal is being created to serve as depository of innovations and platform for exchange of ideas.
A strong eco-system for supporting innovation activity will require enthusiastic support and committed participation of all stakeholders.
The public sector, private sector, education sector, and our citizens at large must be willing contributors to such efforts.
The efforts do not necessarily require any grand platform and can begin from home, school, college, university and work place.
It is important to ignite the young minds with the spirit of innovation.
We must encourage them to pursue their curiosity and creativity.
We must help them discover the fascination of creating something new.
In the Conference of Vice Chancellors of Central Universities held this year, a recommendation was made to set up Innovators Clubs in the Central Universities to facilitate interaction between the teaching and student communities and at the same time grassroots innovators living around the campus.
Yesterday, I had the privilege to open the first such club at the Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University (BBAU).
I was happy to see the innovations that have been made by the young people.
I am confident that this initiative taken by BBAU at Lucknow will soon reach all the 40 Central Universities.
On National Technology Day, I urge all the citizens to take a pledge to make innovation a way of life.
I would like to conclude by saying that innovation in thought, innovation in effort and an all-pervasive innovative spirit can maintain our position and status in the fast changing world, where technological obsolescence is the order of the day.
It gives me immense pleasure to be here today for the fourth Convocation of Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, whose foundation was laid in 1989 by our young Prime Minister, Late Shri Rajiv Gandhi.
Established by the Government of Uttar Pradesh, it became a Central University in 1996.
I take this opportunity to pay my respectful tribute to this great man of India, Babasaheb Ambedkar.
Dr. Ambedkar was a champion of the democratic principles of liberty, equality, fraternity and justice.
Taking a cue from the ideals he espoused, this University, I am told, is pursuing an innovative blend of educational and social objectives.
This is reflected in its academic programmes that comprise Information Science and Technology, Management Studies, Home Science and Ambedkar Studies.
Education is a crucial element for national progress, human empowerment and social change.
The rising incidents of crime against women and children call for effective measures to ensure their safety and security.
It also calls for arresting the moral decline in our society.
We must find solutions for bringing such degradation of values to an immediate halt.
Our universities, that possess the capability to shape the minds of the youth, should set the process of redefining our moral values in motion.
These temples of higher learning must act as guides in meeting the contemporary moral challenges and ensure that our civilizational values of compassion for all; love for motherland; respect for women; truth and honesty in life; discipline and self-restraint in conduct, and responsibility in action are fully entrenched in the minds of the young boys and girls.
Dear students, we are on the verge of a demographic revolution as the proportion of working-age population is expected to be more than 64 per cent by 2021.
Between 2011 and 2016, the working age group will swell by 63.5 million persons.
This dynamism in our population structure is for us to reap if we can make our young people healthy, educated and skilled.
Our education system should play an enabling role to transform this demographic expansion into a great national asset.
The progress made by us in the higher education sector is significant.
There are over 650 degree giving institutions and over 33,000 colleges in the country today.
During the Eleventh Five Year Plan period, 65 new Central Institutions, including 21 Central Universities, were established.
Except for one state, there is at least one Central University in every state of the country.
Despite this, we continue to be challenged by problems of quantity and quality.
The number of quality academic institutions in India is quit inadequate, due to which, many meritorious students go abroad for higher education.
There are more than 2 lakh Indian students studying abroad, including US and UK.
It will be our undoing if we cannot draw our students to seek higher education in their own country.
The quality of education imparted in our higher educational institutions leave a lot to be desired.
There is a need to change the mechanics of rendering education and the time for it is now.
Our universities must deliver education of international standards.
Every university should identify one department that can be developed into a Centre of Excellence.
I call upon the Central universities to spearhead this transformation.
Keeping in mind the need to effect innovative changes in the higher education sector, a conference of the Vice Chancellors of Central Universities was organized in the Rashtrapati Bhavan in February this year.
The conclusions arrived at the Conference on the immediate, short-term and medium-term measures to bring the necessary changes in the education system are being worked upon by the Ministry of Human Resource Development.
I hope that by the time we commence the next Conference, substantial progress would be on our cards.
Increasing the access to higher education is a necessary step towards inclusion.
It must be made affordable for meritorious students from economically difficult background through scholarships, student loans and other student-aid measures.
Many places in our country are devoid of a higher educational institution in their vicinity.
Our efforts must be directed at bringing higher education closer to our population by resorting to innovative techniques of education delivery.
The facilities provided by the National Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology should be utilized on a greater scale.
With technology, collaborative information sharing is possible.
It will be easy to transmit important lectures to students studying in institutions situated far away from the urban centre.
Knowledge sharing and consultation is the edifice on which inter-disciplinary, inter-institutional academic cooperation can be built up.
An important facilitator for this is a reliable electronic platform.
The National Knowledge Network envisages connecting 1,500 knowledge generating institutions through high speed broad band network.
I am happy to note that about two-third of the institutions have already entered the network.
I am confident of speedy connection for the remaining institutions.
Faculty is a crucial element of our education system.
It is a worrying sign that many faculty positions in universities remain vacant for quit some time.
In Central Universities alone, vacancy is about 38 per cent.
The existing shortage of teachers could negate our efforts at quality enhancement.
Immediate steps should therefore be taken to fill up the vacancies.
Our teachers must be equipped with the latest information and knowledge.
The refresher courses conducted by the Academic Staff Colleges warrant a more frequent review to retain their relevance to contemporary teaching.
There are teachers who motivate students to think from different perspectives.
These teachers can spur holistic learning and new thinking.
In a world marked by increasing constraints on natural resources, innovation will be the key to future growth.
China and the US are at the forefront of innovation with over 5 lakh patent applications filed by each country in 2011.
India, with only 42,000 patent applications, lags behind these leaders.
Our academia and the industry have a lot to contribute towards innovation activity.
In our academic institutions, research is low on preference.
Only 0.4 per cent of the 260 lakh students enrolled at under-graduate level and above in 2011-12 were PhD students.
The onus is on our higher educational institutions to make use of this policy to consolidate our standing as a knowledge economy.
This decade is the decade of innovation.
Innovation will carry meaning only if it translates into benefits for those at the bottom of the socio-economic pyramid.
In the Conference of Vice Chancellors of Central Universities held this year, a recommendation was made to set up Innovators Clubs in the Central Universities to facilitate interaction between the teaching and student communities and grassroots innovators.
I am glad to note that this University has set up such a club.
I congratulate all those involved, including the National Innovation Foundation, for taking this step.
I am sure this initiative will soon reach all the 40 Central Universities.
There are many grassroots innovations that, due to lack of technological and commercial support, remain denied of development into marketable products.
Mentoring of grass root innovators by universities and industry would help in taking the benefits of technology closer to the people.
I look forward to seeing some of the exciting new innovations on display in the Innovation Exhibition today.
We must build an academic environment conducive for research.
Our system should have adequate flexibility to attract Indian researchers working abroad to return and work on short-term assignments.
Education should be the medium for nation building at the macro level and character building at the micro level.
I hope that the education you have gained will make you reflect inwards and facilitate your engagement with the world outside.
Young students, when you leave the portals of this great institution, the advise of your seniors and teachers will no longer be available, but you need not feel desperate, you need not feel lonely, you need not feel scared because the knowledge, skill and confidence injected in you has made you competent enough to face the challenges of life.
It gives me great pleasure to be present here for the Convocation of Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi Memorial Medical College.
This Medical College was established in the memory of Late Shri Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi, who was a freedom fighter and a learned journalist.
A staunch advocate of social justice, he was a crusader for the oppressed.
He sacrificed his life for the nation at the young age of forty years.
I pay my homage to this noble son of India.
This Medical College should be guided by the ideals he stood for.
It was created to develop postgraduate medical education and to produce specialists in several medical disciplines.
It is today known for its academic excellence and comprehensive patient care facilities.
Those associated with its establishment and growth should have a justifiable sense of pride and satisfaction.
Unless citizens enjoy good health, their productive potential cannot be unleashed fully.
The health status of our population has improved substantially over the years.
But, we are still short of our goals.
The infant mortality rate is high at 44 per 1000 live births, while the maternal mortality rate is also high at 212 per 1 lakh live births.
We have envisaged reducing infant mortality rate to 25 and maternal mortality rate to 100 by the end of the Twelfth Plan period.
We must increase our focus on those states that are lagging behind.
The role of Institutes like yours will be crucial in strengthening the health system in the country.
Availability, quality and affordability are the three cornerstones of a sound healthcare system.
The National Rural Health Mission, launched in 2005, was a landmark initiative aimed at restructuring health service in our country.
It was designed to take healthcare to the doorstep of the rural population through a network of sub-centres, primary health centres and community health centres.
I am happy to note the positive results of this Mission.
It has created a huge infrastructure of 1.8 lakh health centres in the country.
This Mission has also added over 1.4 lakh healthcare personnel in the system.
Availability of better infrastructure, trained manpower, effective drugs and modern equipment has led to significant improvement in service delivery.
But much more needs to be done.
There is a need to increase spending on health to augment health services in our country.
Public expenditure on health in India is 1.2 per cent of its GDP.
This is much lower than the 4 per cent plus level in countries like US, UK, Australia, Norway and Brazil.
Public sector spending is constrained by competing needs.
We must therefore encourage increased participation of private healthcare providers.
We must develop innovative models to engage them in imparting quality healthcare services.
For universal health coverage, affordability is crucial.
Expensive medical treatment can be burdensome for people, especially for the poor.
In fact, many descend into poverty on account of that.
This scenario should be rectified by strengthening the health insurance mechanism.
The Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana gives beneficiaries cash less in-patient treatment.
Its scope should be widened to provide the insured access to comprehensive primary, secondary and tertiary medical care.
We must ensure its coverage to every one below the poverty line.
Our health coverage strategy should look beyond medical cure and intervention.
Preventive healthcare is relevant in a country like India where lifestyle diseases have shown a rising trend.
Our health system must, therefore, be equipped to not only treat people but also guide them about prevention of these medical conditions.
Hygiene and sanitation also play a critical role in preventing diseases.
To ensure that efforts in this direction are effective, we must encourage the active participation of local participatory bodies.
The use of technology in healthcare should be fully recognized.
Using satellite technology, the telemedicine project has connected remote health centres with super specialty hospitals in urban areas and helped expert healthcare consultation to reach the needy and under-served people.
More uses of technology in healthcare should be explored.
We have to find effective and inexpensive cure for many diseases.
To reduce our reliance on costly imported equipments for medical procedures, there is a need to develop such instruments indigenously.
This policy should be leveraged by our medical schools, research laboratories, and the pharmaceutical and instrumentation industries to develop better formulations and make sophisticated medical instruments.
The innovations taking place in our hospitals and medical colleges must be recognized to provide encouragement for such activity.
Quality healthcare services require adequate number of competent healthcare professionals.
We hope to increase the density of such medical professionals to 354 by the end of the Twelfth Plan.
This calls for setting up more institutes for quality medical education.
It is good that six AIIMS like institutions are being set up to give impetus to such efforts.
There is also a need to increase the capacity of our existing medical schools and nursing colleges and enhance their standards.
I am confident that our public medical colleges will be able to meet the twin challenge of greater quantity and better quality.
The success of our healthcare system will depend on the competency, commitment and dedication of our doctors and other medical professionals.
Medical institutions like yours should give a serious thought to the kind of health system that our country should have.
Whether we possess a fully commercial system based on profit incentive or a one responsive to our socio-economic conditions depends on the kind of value education that you will inculcate in the students.
I call upon you to build in the minds of the young doctors a strong sense of patriotism and social responsibility.
The urge for our young doctors to undergo higher studies in premier institutions abroad to acquire greater expertise and widen their horizon is easily understandable.
But they should retain the sacred link with their own motherland.
We must find ways to enable such meritorious and qualified doctors to contribute to national welfare.
Medicine is a profession respected by all in society.
Doctors are given a place next to God.
I am sure our medical fraternity will respect the good faith and trust that people have bestowed upon them.
Doctors entering the profession are administered the Hippocratic Oath.
It is necessary to instill in the young minds the true meaning of this oath.
The medical institutions therefore have a duty to infuse the notions of ethical behaviour in their students.
I congratulate the students who have received their degrees today.
Your professional degree has empowered you to contribute to the nation, to touch and transform the lives of millions.
I hope that you will remain firm in your conviction to the higher objective of selfless service to society.
I wish you all success in life and career.
This is entirely consistent with the reverence with which Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore is cherished in both India and Bangladesh.
We have both preserved and celebrated the legacy of this great sole as an intrinsic part of our shared heritage.
In both our nations, songs that he composed became our national anthems.
Be it politics, social reforms including gender equity, rural development, religion, education, aesthetics, philosophical discourse and international relations, Gurudev had inspired many of our greatest national leaders with his rational and humanist approach.
These papers will contribute in a significant way to a better understanding of Tagore the philosopher, writer, composer and artist and provide an excellent means to appreciate the importance of his reflections and ideas for seeking solutions in the current difficult context, be it national, regional or global.
I congratulate the Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) that has played a central role in the successful conduct of the Conference, in cooperation with counterpart institutions and agencies in Bangladesh.
When we recall Tagore, what comes to mind is his abiding love for pluralism and multiculturalism in an open society and his deep commitment to his civilisational roots, combined with an internationalism that readily accepted new ideas and methodologies.
Tagore simultaneously had a deep interest in rural reconstruction and development strategies, including rural credit as essential inputs for creating a better balance in society.
His first hand experience of the plight of the marginalized farmers was compelling.
Most of these, as we know, are not only relevant, but provide the simple solutions to some of the vexing problems that have delayed development in many parts of our region.
As an educationist and reformer, Tagore believed that community development should be based on self help and an informed, enlightened approach to the issues that confronted our society.
In those early days of the 20th century, he wrote about grain banks and development of women entrepreneurship, as also prohibition of alcohol, modernization of farming methods and development of alternative sources of income for the farming community.
These principles are central to the Government programmes under implementation today.
In fact, Tagore had decided to focus on a couple villages and create a template that could be replicated in the rest of the country.
His thinking was in many ways much ahead of his times.
He had written in the Gitanjali,
Those whom you leave behind will pull you behind
The more you envelop them under darkness of ignorance,
It is with such a guidance that we should whole heartedly apply ourselves to correcting the path that our society is presently pursuing.
There is something very wrong in our moral make up and we have no one to blame as long as we do not make a conscious effort to anaylse the symptoms and their causes.
Tagore was inspired by the Upanishads and Gita, by the Bhakti movement in India and the philosophy of the Bauls in Bengal.
In all of these he saw the need for man to discover the God in himself and steer his actions accordingly, with a sense of his dharma and a sense of purpose.
In both his paintings as well as his lyrics, Tagore never failed to pay tribute to women and their crucial role in the evolution of a better society.
We are only too aware of his intense focus on the transformational role of education and its impact on children, women and young adults and his emphasis on women's empowerment and their role in changing societal mindsets, both within the family and in the wider community.
We cannot afford to dilute the Indian way.
As I leave this thought with you, I would like to express my deep appreciation to Prof. Arefin Siddique, Vice Chancellor, University of Dhaka for his presence here today.
He is foremost among the erudite and influential people in India and in Bangladesh that have, through their work and leadership, brought the peoples of our two countries ever closer to each other.
Their sustained efforts have transformed our bilateral discourse and brought about a unique mutual understanding between our nations at multiple levels.
I am glad to have this opportunity to be present on the inauguration of the All India Seminar on welfare activities for members of the legal fraternity and compliment the Bar Council of Delhi for taking the initiative in holding a discussion on this issue.
I am a student of law and have graduated in the subject.
Lawyers and their lives always create immense interest for me.
The reality, however, is that such lawyers constitute an extremely small fraction of the entire community.
The large majority struggle to survive and uphold the law amidst very difficult circumstances, with little public attention, poor infrastructure, meagre earnings and stiff competition.
Women lawyers and those with other disadvantages find the going even more tough.
I am particularly happy about the focus on women in the Seminar because there is wide recognition of the need to ensure the safety and security of women in our society at large.
Women lawyers can play an important leadership role in this regard.
But, it is absolutely essential that an appropriate and conducive environment be ensured for them in the first instance.
I gather that a group of lady lawyers in the Supreme Court have moved a petition to seek the enforcement of the Courts own verdict in the Vishakha case on providing a more congenial workplace environment within the Courts for lady lawyers.
I am sure the Supreme Court will give expeditious attention to the matter.
They highlight the urgency with which we need to introspect at the erosion of values and our repeated failure to ensure safety and security of our women and children.
We must ensure the dignity and respect for women at all times.
The legal fraternity, especially women lawyers must be in the vanguard of enabling our nation reset its moral compass.
Lawyers and the Bar Council of Delhi must do everything possible to disseminate the values of human dignity and equality as well as ensuring that the rights of women are protected at all times.
The judiciary is one of the most important pillars of our vibrant democracy.
Lawyers play an extremely important role in enabling the public access justice and ensuring that our Constitution becomes a living reality.
The legal profession is regarded a noble profession in every society where the rule of law prevails.
In fact it can be argued that training as lawyers and exposure to legal systems in India and abroad for our leaders played a major role in the evolution of our unique national movement which sought to wrest from the British freedom, basic rights and democracy using reason, argument, peace, non-violence and moral courage.
I have no hesitation in stating today that the Indian legal system as a whole has lived up to the faith and confidence of the people.
The Bar as well as the Bench deserves unequivocal recognition for this stellar achievement.
The quality and speed with which justice is delivered is at the heart of our democracy.
It is essential that we ensure the legal fraternity is knowledgeable, well trained, socially committed and equipped with the best of facilities and infrastructure.
Lawyers should be confident and secure in their profession.
Only then can they work to make sure that the justice system delivers the best results possible to the citizens of our country.
I am happy to know that the Bar Council of Delhi is committed to making a reality the words of Mahatma Gandhi when he said lawyers should not make their profession subservient to the interest of their purse, but use their skills for the service of our country.
I believe when the Advocates Act was passed in 1961 there were only around 3000 lawyers across the country.
Today, the Bar Council of Delhi alone has around 70,000 members and I understand there are almost 17 Lakh lawyers enrolled across the nation.
There exists huge disparities between the elite at the top of the profession and young lawyers who support them and make their success possible.
New entrants to the legal profession need to be helped find their feet.
Aside from the enrolment fees of advocates, other sources of funding for this Welfare Fund include voluntary contributions, contributions from other advocates, contributions from the Bar Council of India and also sums collected by way of sale of welfare stamps affixed on the Vakalatnama.
The Act also provides that if an advocate ceases to practice as a result of permanent disability, the Trustee Committee may pay such member an amount similar to what such individual would be entitled to receive according to the length of their practice.
The Trustee Committee of such funds is also required to take Group Life Insurance on the life of the members of the fund and may use the funds for construction or maintenance of common facilities for its members.
As with many of the laws in the country, the challenge is to ensure effective implementation of this legislation.
I am sure there is also need to mobilise additional resources for the Welfare Fund.
Law is a very demanding profession and can be particularly arduous for lady members who have to juggle familial obligations alongside professional tasks.
I have absolutely no doubt that women lawyers are as good if not better than many of their male counterparts.
Unfortunately, they are still to get their full share.
The Supreme Court has had only a handful of lady judges so far and designated Senior Advocates are also few in number.
There is need for a conscious effort to establish a level playing field in this regard.
Lawyers should drive the fulfilment of democratic values and lawyers as a group must campaign for positive change in society.
While representing their clients preserve the rule of law and act as safeguards of the individual rights of citizens, lawyers have a larger role to play in our constitutional democracy and should not shy away from this responsibility.
I am confident the deliberations in the Seminar will generate new ideas on additional welfare activities which could be undertaken and how to go about the same.
I am sure such initiatives will boost the confidence and morale of the younger members of the legal fraternity.
I congratulate the Bar Council of Delhi for having taken the lead in organising a Seminar of this nature, which is of significance to lawyers across the country.
I wish the Seminar and all its participants every success.
I hope these deliberations will lead to concrete action by the Bar Council of Delhi as well as all concerned authorities.
Let me conclude with a quote from two legal scholars, Mr. Rennard Strickland & Mr. Frank T. Read.
Lawyers are called upon to make distinctions, to explain how and why cases or experiences are alike or different.
Lawyers are expected to restore equilibrium, to be balancers.
Every discipline, every profession, every job, and every calling has a cutting edge.
At that cutting edge, lines are drawn.
Lawyers and judges are society's ultimate line drawers.
I am indeed happy to participate in the ceremonial session of the Annual General Meeting of the Indian Red Cross Society and the St. John Ambulance (India).
I extend a warm welcome to all the volunteers of these organizations, many of whom have come from far to attend this important event.
I congratulate all the award winners, who have been recognized for their exemplary services towards humanitarian causes.
The Red Cross and St. John Ambulance have been active in their service to the humanity.
The Red Cross, in its history of 150 years, has upheld the fundamental values of humanity, impartiality, neutrality, independence, voluntary service, unity and universality.
In India, the Indian Red Cross Society and St. John Ambulance have been at the forefront of humanitarian service in the country since 1920.
The Indian Red Cross Society is truly a pan-Indian organization.
It operates through 700 branches and draws millions of volunteers and members to carry out its programmes.
St. John Ambulance (India) also commands a wide reach in the country with its 21 state and 3 union territory centres, 9 railway centres, and many regional and local centres.
The Indian Red Cross Society and St. John Ambulance (India) have increased the reach of their programmes in no small measure.
They have marked their presence increasingly through schools of nursing, homes for the elderly, tuberculosis programmes, disaster response and preparedness, and education on positive attitude for children and youth.
Millions of people have benefitted from the expansion in their efforts.
Resources are a key ingredient to sustain philanthropic activities.
I am told that the financial health of the Indian Red Cross Society has improved considerably in recent years.
Both the organizations are now financially sustainable, and are in a comfortable position to further enhance the scale of their efforts.
There is a need to maintain a uniform standard in the delivery of service and provision of assistance.
I, therefore, applaud the initiative to frame uniform rules for the Indian Red Cross Society.
I urge the remaining branches to also implement these standards.
Despite the progress made by mankind, it can exercise no control over occurrence of natural disasters.
While we may not be able to prevent such unfortunate events from occurring, we can definitely lessen their adverse impact on human lives.
For that, the quick response mechanisms for relief must be reinforced.
But immediate disaster relief also calls for efficient local response.
It is in these situations that volunteer-based organizations like the Indian Red Cross Society and St. John Ambulance (India) can play a very crucial role.
Local volunteers, who understand local conditions better, can deal with disasters in the locality more effectively.
It is gratifying to note that the Indian Red Cross Society is developing local community members to respond to such challenges.
I am told that newly renovated warehouses have enabled the Indian Red Cross Society to deal with disaster responses with greater efficacy.
It is well placed to partner with government authorities to quickly provide aid and relief.
The collaborative efforts of the Society with other similar organizations also have the potential for more efficient and effective handling of disaster situations.
Economic prosperity of our country is manifested in the increasing purchasing power of the people.
The number of cars on Indian roads has multiplied during the last four to five decades.
This has unfortunately resulted in a substantial increase in the number of road accidents.
The number of deaths due to accidents in India in 2009 at 10.8 per one lakh population is far higher than in countries like Japan and UK, where it is less than 5 per one lakh population.
This calls for pro-active programmes to ensure immediate medical assistance during road accidents so as to minimize the loss of life.
The success of any organization lies in the development of its skilled manpower.
I am told that the Indian Red Cross Society has taken steps for capacity building and skill development.
It will ensure the availability of highly trained manpower at the time of disasters.
I compliment those who are behind this initiative and urge them to further expand the capacity of such trained workforce.
The Indian Red Cross Society is known for its promotion of health related causes like blood donation.
85 per cent of the blood donated through the Society is on voluntary basis.
I take this opportunity to call upon our young men and women to come forward in a big way and take part in voluntary blood donation.
Greater sensitization of our youth towards this important social service is absolutely necessary.
Our efforts must be to ensure that not a single person in need of blood is left unanswered.
Our demography is today characterized by a growing number of elderly people.
We must ensure that those who have invested a lifetime in the growth of their families and the nation are not left alone without care.
The Home healthcare attendant programme of these organizations aimed at training young people to take care of the elderly is a laudable initiative.
I look forward to seeing many young people trained for this noble vocation.
The energy of youth and the wisdom from experience of the elderly will surely lead to mutual benefit for the care-provider and the care-recipient.
The contribution of Indian Red Cross Society to the development of weaker communities overseas has grown over the years.
I am told that India has become one of the most significant donors to the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
The Indian Red Cross Society is playing an important role at the international level in matters of health and development, blood donation policy and disaster response and recovery.
It is a challenge to work for society in a voluntary capacity, even though it is satisfying.
It holds true for the members and volunteers of these two organizations as well.
It gives me great pleasure to be in your midst on the occasion of the 60th National Film Awards Function.
I hear that he is indisposed but I am sure he will recover well and fast.
I wish him a long and healthy life.
My congratulations also to the National Film Award winners.
Today, the Indian cinema is one hundred years old.
When the technology of cinema reached the shores of India in the early 20th century, the Indian community welcomed and adopted it wholeheartedly.
This medium was effectively used to strengthen the tradition of story-telling in our country.
Later, as years went by, cinema evolved into a powerful medium encompassing all regions and languages of India and thus reflecting the socio-political aspirations of our people.
The film industry has adapted to technological changes, transforming from a silent black and white format to advanced digital form.
In fact, Indian cinema has now become a global enterprise.
It has upgraded itself, as also radically altered the manner in which it reaches the audience.
I am proud that Indian cinema today has found a market in a large number of countries.
Increasingly, our film makers are being recognised and given a place of acclaim in the international film festivals.
We have a rich and varied cultural heritage that has been, and continues to be, a very significant base for telling the world the story of India - a nation whose history goes back many millennia, a nation that occupies an important place in the contemporary world and a nation whose future holds great promise.
This trend is encouraging.
I hope the number of entries in coming years shall continue to increase.
This is one occasion which is awaited every year by the Indian film industry, for it is the time when the deserving are honoured for their creative and aesthetic excellence.
It is also an occasion when new and upcoming talents get recognition.
The number of awards being given this year is reflective of the fact that Indian cinema has greatly improved in terms of quality.
Ladies and Gentleman,
Cinema is a powerful medium for conveying a message.
The language of Cinema, in many ways, transcends regions and boundaries.
The number of people who watch and are influenced by films is very large in our country.
The recent incidents of crime and against women and children have shaken the conscience of the nation.
We must find ways to reverse the erosion of our values.
In this context, I would like to stress upon the crucial role the Cinema can and must play in resetting the moral compass of the nation.
It is the responsibility of everyone associated with the film industry to use the powerful medium of cinema to portray our positive societal values for building a tolerant and harmonious India.
I call upon the entertainment industry to be mindful and sensitive to this responsibility and take all steps to provide cinema that is morally energising.
I am glad to learn that Ministry of Information and Broadcasting is taking several measures for promoting Indian Cinema such as nurturing and encouraging production of quality and meaningful films, showcasing them as well as preserving our filmic heritage.
I also learn that to promote film shooting in the country, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting is setting up an Inter-Ministerial Committee for Promotion and Facilitation of Film Production in India which would function as a single window of various agencies of the Government in giving clearances for film shooting in the country.
I am sure this will go a long way in strengthening our film industry.
In this fast paced environment, the technique and aesthetics of cinema is also changing.
But even in the midst of this change, there are talents that leave a lasting footprint.
Their works carry an essence of timelessness and are appreciated across generations.
He started his film career as a hero but later took on roles of the quintessential gentleman villain.
In the sheer variety of roles that he did, he excelled in each one of them.
I would like to convey my compliments to all Members of the Jury for the untiring effort they put in assessing the entries that came to them.
I take this opportunity to once again congratulate each one of the award winners and wish them continued success in their pursuit of excellence.
I am confident that their creativity will touch new heights in the years ahead and that they will continue to provide good as well as value based entertainment.
Thank you.
JAI HIND
It gives me great pleasure to be here today for the Golden Jubilee Day celebrations of the Indian Institute of Foreign Trade (IIFT).
This is an occasion to recognize the enormous intellectual contribution made by the Institute in foreign trade and international business.
I have fond memories of my association with the Institute during my two tenures as the Commerce Minister.
I am told that this book continues to be an important reference for understanding the nuances of Trade in Services.
As the Commerce Minister, I had the privilege to contribute to the negotiations that led to the formation of the World Trade Organization (WTO) in January, 1995.
The IIFT, since its inception in 1963, has been at the forefront of research and capacity building in international trade.
This Institute has provided able support to the Government in responding to the challenges faced by our trade and industry from the very beginning.
In 1966, the foreign exchange position became unstable due to increased food imports necessitated by drought.
The oil price shocks of 1973-74 and 1979-80 had similarly strained our foreign exchange reserves.
In 1991, a host of factors like the Gulf crisis, fiscal imbalance, and weakening of international confidence led to a balance of payment problem.
In July of that year, we had foreign exchange reserves enough to finance imports for only a fortnight.
Crises of such proportions required deft handling that called for sound policy advice.
Seminars, research projects, and other academic programmes conducted by IIFT have rendered valuable inputs to our policy makers for better understanding of the problems.
The setting up of the WTO marked an important event in international trade and investment.
To facilitate greater understanding of the multilateral trade regime and to build expertise in the Government, a Centre for WTO Studies was established in IIFT in 1997-98.
We have viewed exports as a means of employment generation and have given a thrust on employment intensive industry.
To reduce dependence on imports, we have encouraged domestic manufacturing for inputs to export industry.
To build export competitiveness, we have promoted technology up-gradation.
We have pursued market diversification to evade the risk of global downturn.
We have also encouraged exports from the North Eastern Region, which has a special place in our economy.
Experience of many economies has shown that reducing trade barriers increases the efficiency of resource use leading to higher growth.
In the Union Budget for 1991-92, the maximum rate of import duty was reduced from 300 to 150 per cent.
After progressive liberalization, the peak rate of customs duty for non-agricultural products today stands at only 10 per cent.
We have been following a policy of globalization as a strategy to achieve higher economic growth.
The international trade to GDP ratio, which was just 15 per cent in 1991-92, is now 44 per cent.
Our export sector has done well.
From US Dollar 17.9 billion in 1991-92, the value of exports has increased to US Dollar 300.6 billion in 2012-13.
We must ensure the availability of enough food in the country at all times.
Every citizen should have access to affordable food.
Higher export growth has contributed to an improved economic performance in the last decade.
The average annual growth rate during the last 10 years was a healthy 7.9 per cent.
The ongoing global financial crisis has decelerated our economic growth in the last two years.
The GDP growth in 2012-13 has been estimated at a muted 5.0 per cent but I am confident that we will bounce back.
The increased integration of our economy with that of the world calls for managing our economy from the risk of any global financial crisis.
We have diversified our export market, by focusing on countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
These geographies accounted for two-third of our exports in 2012-13.
The slowdown of the global economy has impacted our external sector.
But due to the market diversification strategy, we have been able to mitigate the impact considerably.
A matter of concern is the current account deficit, which at 5.4 per cent of GDP during the period April to December, 2012 is very high.
Though we have managed this deficit through capital flows, we have to increase our exports to bring it to a sustainable level.
A strong revival of the global economy is expected in 2014.
At a time when global demand is yet to firm up, there is a need to strengthen our export industry.
Our efforts have for long been to build the competitiveness of our export sector.
To give greater thrust to export promotion, over 158 Special Economic Zones have been set up.
The Export Promotion Capital Goods scheme has enabled exporters to import machinery and equipment for producing quality goods for export.
We have taken a proactive stance at forging trade and economic partnerships with several economies and trading blocs.
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreements have been entered into with Singapore, South Korea, Japan and Malaysia.
Such an agreement has recently been concluded with ASEAN.
Increased trade liberalization and economic cooperation will not count much unless they result in tangible benefits for our people.
Hence, thrust should also be placed on meeting other objectives like employment generation and regional development.
Our export sector should be able to drive the socio-economic development of our country.
Over the years, IIFT has broadened its academic framework by providing management education and PhD courses.
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the officers, who have successfully completed their professional training.
I have had decades of association with the department from my days as MOS in Finance Ministry in the 70's.
I have visited National Academy of Direct taxes (NADT), on a number of occasions.
I am therefore witness to the evolution and growth of this premier academy.
The Income Tax Act is one of the oldest Acts in India.
It was introduced in 1860 as a punitive tax by the British after the rebellion of 1857.
Since Mr. James Wilson introduced Income Tax in British India, the Department has come a long way.
Not only has there been a quantum increase in the collection of direct taxes, but it now accounts for the majority of tax collections.
Direct taxes are anti inflationary compared to indirect taxes.
They are still below the target we want to reach but the rise to over 50 percent of revenue is a positive feature.
Tax collection is neither a simple nor popular task.
Tax collectors should be conscious of the rights and duties of citizens.
The tax payer should be seen as an important partner in generating revenue for all our national endeavours.
In a globalized world, more than two-thirds of trade is between related group entities.
The inter-group transactions offer an opportunity for multinational enterprises to locate their profits in favourable tax jurisdictions with low taxes or no taxes.
Issues like Transfer Pricing are also very complicated.
Taxation has thus acquired new complexities with political, legal as well as international ramifications.
India has been taking measures in the form of Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements and Tax Information Exchange Agreements to safeguard its interests.
Earlier, countries were very reluctant to share information.
One of the indirect benefits of the 2008 financial crisis was that recalcitrant countries have been compelled to share information.
The Income Tax department has been one of the front runners in taking technological initiatives with a view to handle the expectations of our tax payers.
The modernisation of our tax laws is very important.
The Government depends on you to collect taxes from the people in an efficient manner.
I have no doubt you will discharge your responsibilities to the motherland with competence and confidence.
I am happy to be present at this Convocation ceremony of SKM University, Dumka.
I recall my earlier visit to your university in March, 2011 on the occasion of the Convocation 2011, and I am delighted to know that your institution has since made rapid strides.
I have been informed that many new initiatives have been taken by your university to improve the standards of teaching and research.
It gives me great satisfaction to know that SKM University is playing a stellar role in the socio-economic transformation of a populace which comprises large tribal populations of Paharias and Santhals.
The demographics of this region and the socio-economic requirements of its tribal population make it all the more imperative that you continue in your efforts with zeal and dedication.
This University is a tribute to two legendary freedom fighters from this region, Sido Murmu and Kanhu Murmu.
Their contribution to the nation will remain immortalized in the name of this University.
It is now for this University to spread the message and values for which these great men struggled and made the supreme sacrifice.
The SKM University has provided easy access to quality education to the poor students of Santhal Pargana.
Ever since its inception, it has set the highest standards of excellence and quality.
It is gratifying to note that the University plans to develop its own campus with modern facilities in a 109 acre area at Digghi.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
We all recognize the critical role that education plays in the development of a nation.
It is the prime mover of the progress of a country.
They highlight the urgency with which our society should introspect at the erosion of values and our repeated failure to ensure safety and security of our women and children.
We must identify and find solutions for such criminal depravity.
The dignity and respect for women must be ensured at all times.
In my Address to the Nation on the eve of the last Republic Day, I had stated that it is time for the nation to reset its moral compass.
I call upon those who educate and nurture the minds of the youth, and who wield a moral authority in the society to set this process in motion.
Our universities and academic institutions also have a responsibility to take the lead and impart education that will help us meet the moral challenge of our times.
It must help in spreading the values of human dignity and equality in the society.
India is in the process of fast and radical change, a process which is unstoppable.
However, change is occurring at very different speeds in each segment of society.
The successful management of this change is the biggest challenge of our times.
Our response to this challenge will determine the destiny of India as a nation.
We simply cannot fail in this test.
The present demographic profile of India lends strong credence to this belief.
According to an estimate, by the year 2020 the average age of India will be 29 years.
It will be much lower than the average of 40 years in the U S, 46 years in Japan, and 47 years in Europe.
Over two-thirds of Indians will be of working age by 2025.
If we are able to harness this potential and channelize the productive energy of youth, we can transform the economic fortunes of our country.
To make the most of this opportunity we must invest in education.
It will be a race against time, given present state of our education sector, especially higher education.
According to an international survey of universities, not a single Indian university figures in the list of top 200 universities in the world.
While in the global list we did not figure at all, we had only 11 institutes in the best 300 hundred Asian universities.
This situation must change.
In the world of globalization, universities are regarded as crucial national assets.
Governments around the world have invested heavily in universities.
They are seen as vital sources of new knowledge and innovative thinking, and as providers of skilled personnel with credible credentials.
Besides, they are also acting as magnets of international talent and business investment into a region, as agents of social justice and mobility, and as resources of cultural and social vitality.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Research and innovation must be given new impetus.
Out of 260 lakh students who were enrolled at the undergraduate level and above in 2011-12, only one lakh or 0.4 per cent had registered for PhD.
The total number of patent applications filed by Indians in 2010, was close to only six thousand, while 3 lakh applications were filed by Chinese, around 1.7 lakh filed by Germans, 4.5 lakh by Japanese, and 4.2 lakh by Americans.
The number of patent applications by Indians comprised only 0.3 per cent of the total applications filed in the world, a disappointing figure for a country with a share of 17 per cent in world population.
We have to equip our universities with the necessary facilities without any further delay.
Shortage of faculty should be seen as a core concern.
In central universities close to 51% of posts of professors are lying vacant.
In state universities the conditions are far worse.
Higher educational institutions also suffer from large quality variation.
While urgent steps are being taken to fill the vacancies, we can evolve new ways of employing technology-based learning and collaborative information and communication sharing.
Lectures by eminent professors could be transmitted to educational institutions situated away from the main towns and cities using the facilities offered by the National Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology (NMEICT).
Refresher courses conducted by Academic Staff Colleges may also be similarly transmitted.
Every university should identify a group of 10 to 20 teachers who can ignite the minds of the students beyond the textbooks.
If such teachers regularly interact with each other as well as with students, the quality of teaching could be considerably enhanced.
Their lectures could also be relayed to remote educational institutions through NMEICT Networks.
Open and Distance Learning can also aid in enhancing the reach of higher education.
It is gratifying to know that enrolment in such programmes increased from 27 lakh to 42 lakh during the Eleventh Plan period.
We must promote a culture of excellence in our education system.
At least one department in every university should be transformed into a Centre of Excellence.
To achieve this, the Ministry of Human Resource Development, the UGC and the Universities would have to work together in close collaboration.
Ladies and gentlemen,
With a view to evolving a time-bound action plan and making innovative changes in the higher education sector, a conference of Vice Chancellors of Central Universities was organised in Rashtrapati Bhavan in February this year.
The Conference identified certain immediate, short-term and medium-term measures that are being worked upon by the Ministry of Human Resource Development.
I hope to see substantial progress in the implementation of these measures by the time next conference is held in February 2014.
I had said that we are equal children before our mother, and India asks each one of us, in whatever role we play in the complex drama of nation building, to do our duty with integrity, commitment and unflinching loyalty to the values enshrined in our constitution.
If each one of us follow this principle, I am confident India will become a more vibrant, dynamic and prosperous nation.
Convocation is a joyous occasion in the life of a university.
It marks the culmination of a phase of learning and is a special day in its academic calendar.
I take this opportunity to congratulate all the students graduating today, and the University on providing them the opportunity to pursue their academic goals.
I hope that your training and education from this esteemed institution will help you face challenges of the competitive world, and that you will contribute in your own way towards the progress and prosperity of the nation as well as this State.
Thank you.
Today, as we recognize select Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) for attaining excellence, it is also a time to reiterate our commitment to strengthen the public sector.
I compliment the Department of Public Enterprises and the Standing Conference of Public Enterprises (SCOPE) for organizing this important event.
Our Constitution has been the guiding light to our approach to public sector.
The people of India resolved through the Preamble to secure political, economic and social justice to all its citizens.
Modern technique in industry was limited by its use.
Population growth during the first five decades of the 20th Century was more than 50 per cent but employment generation was not enough to take care of this demographic expansion.
Rapid economic development called for industrialization, creation of employment and infrastructure, balanced regional development and stable prices.
To develop industry, private capital and entrepreneurship was lacking.
Today, private corporate sector savings comprise 7.2 per cent of GDP.
In 1950-51, it was a mere 0.9 per cent.
The public sector became the natural choice as the instrument of development.
The centrality of the public sector in our development process was underlined by the Industrial Policy Resolutions of 1948 and 1956.
The 1956 policy was unequivocal in prescribing a leadership role for the public sector.
Development priorities continued to expand.
Sectors like education, health and environment needed greater public investment.
A paradigm shift in the focus of governance, from producing goods and services to facilitating production came to be increasingly recognized.
With the development of the capital market in India, the risk taking capacity of private entrepreneurs increased as they found it easier to raise resources.
Capital-rich, technologically advanced and globally competitive private players came to occupy a prominent position in the industrial landscape of the country.
These developments led to an appraisal of the portfolio of Government investment in the public sector.
The Industrial Policy Resolution, 1991 defined certain priority areas for growth of CPSEs such as essential infrastructure, exploration and exploitation of oil and mineral resources, and defence equipments.
Reform measures, especially in governance structures of CPSEs, were initiated to meet the challenges emanating from lack of market orientation, functional autonomy and competitiveness.
Managerial and commercial autonomy has been devolved on the profit-making CPSEs through the scheme of Maharatnas, Navratnas and Miniratnas.
There are 7 Maharatnas, 14 Navratnas and 68 Miniratnas today.
I am happy to note that Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited and GAIL (India) Limited have been accorded Maharatna status recently.
I urge upon the Navratna, Miniratna and other CPSEs to continue to improve their performance and meet the criteria for the next level of autonomy.
These measures, by providing the operational flexibility to respond quickly to market, will improve their performance.
Autonomy and accountability are two sides of the same coin.
Autonomy should be matched by adequate accountability.
Mechanisms such as Parliamentary supervision, audit by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, Government representation in Boards and the Memorandum of Understanding between the government and the management specifying performance targets every year, have yielded positive results.
Listing of CPSEs on the stock exchanges could be an additional layer of accountability.
It would also serve as a vehicle of market orientation.
There are 50 listed CPSEs.
Many unlisted CPSEs have the capacity to meet the listing norms.
I am sure that many of them will approach the capital market in the future and avail of the benefits of listing.
The potential to unlock value through listing is high.
The public sector started as the chosen instrument of the Government to usher in economic development.
Economic advancement led to an increasing presence of the private corporate sector, with agile entities running on advanced techno-managerial practices.
This process has also been aided by our policy of opening many sectors to foreign investment.
This approach will reinforce the 1991 Industrial Policy that called for a review of the investment portfolio in the public sector.
Our economy today is the third largest in the world on purchasing power parity basis.
It has the space and the need for co-existence of both the public and the private sectors.
Measures to enhance competitiveness of our public sector have shown good results.
Many CPSEs have successfully competed with the private sector and come out winners.
ONGC stands now as the most valuable company in India.
The growth of our public sector is truly remarkable.
The performance of CPSEs in 2011-12 gives us a big reason for cheer.
The growth potential of CPSEs should be strengthened by greater investment, faster expansion and technology up-gradation.
CPSEs should up-grade their technology models through increased foreign collaboration.
They should target greater overseas investment to enhance their scale of operation and market reach.
I am happy to note that our CPSEs are active in pursuing overseas investment projects.
I am told that ONGC Videsh Limited participates in 30 exploration and production projects in 14 countries.
Five leading CPSEs have formed a joint venture, International Coal Ventures Private Limited, to acquire coal assets abroad.
CPSEs should lay emphasis on corporate social responsibility (CSR) initiatives.
Many CPSEs occupy major portions of towns and cities.
Greenfield CPSEs have set up industrial townships.
These CPSEs should concentrate on CSR activities in the fields of health, education and environmental up-gradation.
There should be no room for limitations in the public sector.
It is a matter of concern that there were 66 sick CPSEs in March, 2012.
Though the number of such CPSEs has declined over the last few years, much more needs to be done to revive, strengthen and modernize these sick units.
The recommendations of the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises have to be acted upon for speedy recovery and prevention of sickness.
I am confident that it will continue to grow in strength and touch greater heights in future and meet the expectations of the nation.
I congratulate all those who have been bestowed with the SCOPE Meritorious Awards for their outstanding performance.
I am very happy to be here to participate in the 45th Convocation of Utkal University, and address this gathering of eminent academicians, intellectuals and students.
This University, which was started in 1943 in a rented building in Cuttack, stands today as an important centre of higher education in the Eastern Region.
With 27 post graduate departments, 2 law colleges, a distance education institution and 365 affiliated colleges, the expanse of this University is both a matter of pride and satisfaction.
I am indeed honoured to be in this University whose foundation stone was laid by Dr. Rajendra Prasad, the first President of India, and which was inaugurated by Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, the second President of our country.
For him, this struggle had no territorial limits.
In the prime of his youth, he risked his life by flying an aircraft into the territory of an imperial power and rescued two great Indonesian freedom fighters and brought them back to safety in India.
This young man could have lost his life, bringing an early end to the story of a political statesman of contemporary India.
His name was Biju Patnaik.
I pay my respectful homage to this great son of India.
Maharaja Krushna Chandra Gajapati, Shri Biswanath Das, Pandit Nilakanth Das and Pandit Godavarish Mishra played a vital role in the establishment of Utkal University.
It is also a strong driver of social thinking and transformation.
The recent increase in cases of brutal assault on women and child rape has shaken the collective conscience of the nation.
These unfortunate incidents underscore the urgency for our society to pause and introspect at the erosion of values and our repeated failure to ensure safety and security of our women and children.
Such criminal depravity is a threat to the civilized functioning of society.
We must identify its causes and find solutions to it.
The society must ensure the dignity and respect for women.
In my Address to the Nation on the eve of the last Republic Day, I had stated that it is time for the nation to reset its moral compass.
I call upon those who educate and nurture the minds of the youth, and who wield moral authority in the society to set this process in motion.
Our universities and academic institutions must take a lead in imparting education which will help us meet the moral challenge of our times.
It must help us build a modern democracy based on values of human dignity and equality.
Our Constitution has laid down that we have to build our society based on the freedom of human spirit, economic opportunities for all and social justice.
We have to make economic growth work for the betterment of our people, especially those at the bottom of the socio-economic pyramid.
Our strategy of inclusive economic growth has shown positive results.
Our average annual economic growth during the last 10 years was 7.9 per cent though it has decelerated to 5.0 per cent in 2012-13.
But I am confident that with the measures being taken, we would return to 7 to 8 per cent growth level in the next two to three years.
Distributive justice, as a higher goal of democratic polity, can be achieved only on the strength of a sound education system.
The higher education system in India rests on the three pillars of quality, affordability and accessibility.
At the end of the Eleventh Five Year Plan period, there were a total of 659 degree awarding institutions and over 33,000 colleges.
The total enrolment of students in higher education, which was 2.6 crore at the end of the Eleventh Plan period, is envisaged to increase to 3.6 crore at the end of the Twelfth Plan period.
The drive to expand higher education in quantitative terms must be matched by adequate efforts at quality improvement.
It is a matter of deep concern that no Indian university, according to an international survey of universities, is ranked within the top 200 universities in the world.
We must direct our energies at developing Indian universities to meet global benchmarks.
There is a need to promote a culture of excellence in them.
This calls for a dynamic higher education system with space for reforms.
Compared to this, it is 21 per cent in Germany and 34 per cent in the US.
This effectively denies many bright students the opportunity to acquire higher education.
Building accessibility will be an important exercise in inclusion.
Our universities should resort to innovative ways of teaching.
Technology can be harnessed for collaborative information sharing.
The infrastructure of the National Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology should be put to greater use.
Transmission of important lectures to students studying in institutions located away from cities and towns can become commonplace.
With several competing demands on public funding, the task of meeting the growing demands in the higher education sector will have to be in part shouldered by the private sector.
Many private institutions have earned international reputation for quality and standards.
We should encourage the participation of private sector without compromising on the social objectives and the quality benchmarks.
The success of inclusion in higher education also depends on affordability.
Meritorious students in difficult economic circumstances should be helped to pursue education by measures like scholarships, student loans and self-help schemes.
The affiliating universities have a great responsibility to guide these colleges to maintain high standards in curricula and evaluation.
Shortage of faculty is a major hindrance for delivering quality education in our universities.
The standard of education cannot be allowed to suffer due to this constraint.
Filling up vacancies must therefore be given higher priority.
Such outstanding teachers must be encouraged to guide new teachers and students.
India lags behind the major economies in terms of innovation.
Though Indians comprise one-sixth of the world population, only one in 50 patent applications in the world are filed in India.
We do not lack the capability to innovate but we lack the systems to encourage and generate innovation.
Our academic environment must be conducive for promotion of research.
Increasing the number of research fellowships, supporting inter-disciplinary and inter-university research partnerships and establishing industry incubation parks are some of the important steps that are necessary.
Our system must run flexibly to attract Indian researchers working abroad to return and work on short-term projects.
Innovation should benefit the common man.
There are grass root innovations that require technical and commercial assistance for converting them into economically viable products.
Our Universities and Industry should form linkages to support such initiatives.
I congratulate all the students who are getting their degrees today.
Please remember that learning is a continuous process.
Life will give you many opportunities to learn.
Keep an open mind and be ready to meet the challenges of life with poise, sincerity and courage.
I am glad to know IFTDO is a worldwide network of Human Resource professionals and is committed to the identification, development and transfer of knowledge, skills and technology to enhance personal growth, human performance, productivity and sustainable development.
I believe it represents more than 500,000 professionals in over 30 countries.
I am delighted the IFTDO has chosen New Delhi as the venue for this Conference and I welcome to India all the distinguished delegates who have travelled from far and wide.
I wish them to have very successful deliberations and a comfortable stay in the country.
This Conference has been organized at an appropriate time as the world is still to recover from the combined impact of the 2008 financial crisis and the recent Euro zone crisis.
There are also critical skills shortages and talent deficit that act as obstacles to speedy recovery of the world economy.
The present millennium has been marked by unprecedented pace of change world over.
Change of this nature has been never before witnessed in the history of mankind.
The new world order has made it possible for business to prosper in an open economy.
This in turn has unleashed various elements of competition amongst organizations.
To meet the challenges of change and competition, there is need to build cutting edge organizations that are lean, agile and responsive, capable of quickly moving to take advantage of new opportunities and remaining ahead of change.
Knowledge and skill obsolescence is a daily reality, with the ever increasing pace of change in technology.
Training, re-training and redeployment of human resources on a continuing basis must be a priority for any organization.
The power of information and communication technology also needs to be harnessed to create an empowering work culture within organizations.
For innovation to be successful, the whole value chain, namely, idea generation, conversion, and diffusion need to happen with efficiency and effectiveness.
It is in this context that capacity building becomes a critical element in the development of any organization.
Human resource development is one of the most effective ways to bring about organizational transformation for sustained growth.
Economies that adequately invest in human resource, and research and innovation, are likely to have higher productivity gains.
At a time when the global economy is trying to emerge from the financial crisis, a paradigm shift in the way global businesses are run can be important contributors to growth.
The world economic growth had declined from 3.9 per cent in 2011 calendar year to 3.2 per cent in 2012.
Though it is expected to revive in 2013, the growth rate is not projected to be significantly higher.
Only in 2014, it is projected to grow at 4.1 per cent.
These are important indicators for the businesses and industries located in different geographies to take cue from and initiate suitable strategies to stay ahead of competition.
In an outlook where global demand is not likely to firm up in the near future, it is the competiveness of firms that will determine their bottom lines.
Technology and manpower are the key drivers to build superior business organizations.
Like most other countries in the world, our economic growth has also declined during the last two years.
In the decade 2003-04 to 2012-13, the average annual economic growth of our economy was a healthy 7.93 per cent.
Of this 10 year period, we have a block of 5 years, from 2008-09 to 2012-13, when the world economic growth was extremely sluggish, fragile and uncertain.
Though our GDP growth in 2012-13 at 5.0 per cent is the lowest in 10 years, it is much higher than that of G-7 countries.
International projections point out that our growth will continue to be better than that of these economies for the next two years.
India has been progressively liberalizing its trade and investment sectors.
While our economy cannot remain immune to a prolonged global financial crisis, we are working hard to reverse the deceleration in growth.
We are confident that we will return to 7 to 8 per cent growth bracket in the next two to three years.
We need to revitalize investments in the country for this purpose.
A Cabinet Committee on Investment has been constituted to approve, monitor and review major projects for their time-bound implementation.
We welcome foreign investment which has a critical role in bringing in modern technology and globalising our economy.
Even as Indian industry steps out to invest abroad, we welcome foreign investors coming to India, and using India as a part of their global supply chain.
In general, foreign investors have been positive about our economy.
According to an important survey, India is the third most preferred destination for Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), after China and the US.
Our infrastructure sector has great potential to make productive use of these investments.
The sectors with high linkage to infrastructure such as automobile, steel and cement, enjoy high growth in India as compared to many of her competitors.
Manpower and technology are the prime drivers of industrial progress.
India is in a phase of unprecedented demographic change.
In 2020, the average Indian will be only 29 years old as compared to an average age of 37 for China and the US, 45 for West Europe and 48 for Japan.
We are conscious of the need to leverage this demographic advantage to enable India become a more vibrant, dynamic and prosperous nation.
To develop our manpower, a National Skill Development Mission has been launched with the goal of skilling 500 million people by 2022 in a public-private initiative.
A Vocational Training Improvement Project has also been started to up-grade 400 industrial training institutes.
I am confident these deliberations will contribute to spurring industry leaders develop capabilities that can accelerate growth across the world.
We in India would like to see our Industry compete successfully with the best in the world.
Skilled manpower and availability of a competent cadre of management professionals will play a key role in this strategy.
In order to achieve its national goal of inclusive growth, India also needs to develop capabilities of our social sector to ensure efficient delivery of services with equity and social justice.
We want to ensure that the fruits of development reach each and every citizen of the country, especially those at the margins of society and the base of the pyramid.
I hope this Conference would provide a significant impetus to field of human resource development within India.
I call upon the IFTDO and Indian Society for Training & Development (ISTD) to continue to play the role of a catalyst in policy formulation and execution of human resource interventions to improve personal and organizational effectiveness.
I take this opportunity to extend my warm greetings to all of you.
I congratulate the Ahimsa Vishwa Bharati for organizing this seminar on a topic of great relevance to contemporary times.
At a time when the world is faced with multiple challenges and we are seeking ways and means to overcome them, the philosophy and teachings enunciated by Bhagwan Mahavira holds great significance.
Despite the luxuries at his disposal, he preferred to lead a simple life.
At 30 years of age, he left the pleasures of the world and discarded all material comfort to become a monk.
He meditated for 12 years to overcome all desires, after which, he attained self-realization and divine knowledge, or keval jnana.
He spent the next 30 years travelling throughout the country overcoming immense physical hardships to preach the eternal truth.
Because of his simplicity and espousal of high morals, he was able to reach out to many believers.
His teachings were based on the concept of self-realization for the attainment of Moksha or liberation.
Bhagwan Mahavira is the 24th and the last Tirthankara.
According to Jain tradition, a Tirthankara is an enlightened soul who having been born as a human being attains enlightenment through meditation and self realization.
Tirthankaras are also called Arihants, or the one who destroys inner enemies like anger, greed or ego.
Bhagwan Mahavira, in human form, became divine as an enlightened soul.
Bhagwan Mahavira propounded a philosophy with the sole aim to improve the quality of life.
He strongly adhered to the theory of Karma and held that it is karma, or our deeds, that decides our destiny.
His message deals with how one can gain freedom from the cycle of birth, life, pain, misery and death, and achieve Moksha or liberation.
He advocated right faith or samyak darshana, right knowledge or samyak jnana, and right conduct or samyak charitra, as crucial for attaining liberation.
To denote right conduct, he specified five essential principles, namely non-violence or ahimsa, truth or satya, wrongful possession or asteya, chastity or brahmacharya, and complete detachment from people, place and material objects or aparigraha.
Bhagwan Mahavira simplified religion by making it devoid of any complicated rituals.
He taught that human life is supreme and that it is important to have positive attitude in life.
He preached the universal gospel of love, stressing that living beings, irrespective of size, shape and form are equal and deserve equal love and respect.
In his life time, he used the principles of right faith, right knowledge and right conduct to resolve many social ills and reform the society.
He brought about social progress on issues such as slavery of women, equality of status to women, and social equality.
For contemporary problems like erosion of environment and natural resources, violence through war and terrorism, religious intolerance, and economic exploitation of poor, answers could be found in his teachings.
The deterioration of environment and depletion of natural resources has engaged the attention of the world today.
Shatjivanikay denotes living beings as having six types of body formation comprising the mobile living being that has 2 to 5 senses, and the living beings with one sense that are water, earth, air, fire and plant.
The practice of ahimsa should be towards all living beings and not just human beings alone.
These concepts exhort human beings to exercise utmost care in consuming natural resources and to desist from polluting the environment.
Bhagwan Mahavira prescribed moderation in the use of resources by adopting carefulness, self restraint and a limit to possession of durable and non-durable assets.
Bhagwan Mahavira also showed us the path of careful consumption.
He preached that both non-availability and excess availability are dangerous.
The concentration of wealth in the hands of a few is one of the causes for growing intolerance today.
Bhagwan Mahavira preached for eliminating the feeling of possessiveness and replacing it with the concept of trusteeship of wealth.
He showed the virtue of this ideal by his own example.
He renounced his wealth completely and led the life of a recluse to attain true knowledge.
Bhagwan Mahavira realized that differences in individual capabilities and needs exist.
He therefore preached social ahimsa comprising compassion, equanimity, love and tolerance to encourage his followers to focus on their own betterment by letting others also achieve the same.
The teachings of Bhagwan Mahavira are still very apt and relevant today.
He preached that one is neither downtrodden nor blessed by birth.
He mentioned that man should be known not by his birth but by his actions.
Practicing such a principle would further the cause of a just social order, an ideal espoused by the builders of the modern society.
The world today is unfortunately divided by race, religion and nationality.
It is also marred by numerous conflicts that originate from such segregation.
Bhagwan Mahavira gave the doctrine of Anekantavada or multiplicity of views and said that opposites co-exist, like white and black or rich and poor.
I am delighted to know that under the guidance of Acharya Dr. Lokesh Muni, Ahimsa Vishwa Bharati is working towards building a society free from violence, terrorism, exploitation, poverty, communalism, caste distinctions, and other social ills.
I am happy to note that for his untiring efforts, Acharyaji has been honoured by the Government with the National Communal Harmony Award, 2010.
I am confident that the Ahimsa Vishwa Bharati will continue to work towards social progress in the country.
I wish the organization all success.
I once again wish all my Jain brothers and sisters on this auspicious occasion.
I am pleased to join you for the Diamond Jubilee Celebrations of the Adimjati Shiksha Ashram, a revered institution devoted to the welfare and development of the tribal community in Manipur.
I am particularly happy that Mr. Rishang Keishing, who has been a Member of Parliament since the first Lok Sabha in 1952 is the Chief Patron of this Ashram and is here with us today.
The initiative of this Ashram for the upliftment of poor tribal children was started due to the untiring efforts of Late Shri Deshbandhu Adhikari, a scholar and social worker from Uttar Pradesh.
He was a great protagonist of national integration.
He started this institution and movement for bringing education, skills and vocational training to the tribal people of Manipur.
Overcoming all odds, a residential Hindi School was established in 1952 to provide free education to the poor tribal students.
Manipur has always had a special place in the mind of all Indians.
In the history of our struggle against colonialism, the King of Manipur was amongst the last to surrender to the British.
The spirit of independence and sovereignty was never extinguished in Manipur.
Manipur was the first place liberated from the British by the Indian National Army led by Netaji Subash Chandra Bose.
A large number of the early generation national leaders like the first Speaker GV Mavalankar, Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, Sardar Govind Ballabh Pant have visited this Ashram.
I have visited Manipur several times in the past and am very happy to be here now.
The Adimjati Shiksha Ashram has done relentless work for the upliftment of the underprivileged and the deprived.
This Ashram has been a forerunner of many initiatives in this State such as conducting training in weaving and tailoring, undertaking tours for promotion of co-curricular activities, Anganwadi training, and running crèche centres.
This Ashram has also been the pioneer of technical education in Manipur.
It is distinguished for having established a technical institute in 1956 for imparting technical education to the tribal students of the North Eastern States.
I am told that this Institute, now run by the Government of Manipur and known as the Government Polytechnic, teaches diploma courses in all mainstream engineering disciplines.
The Adimjati Shiksha Ashram has been instrumental in implementing a scheme of 1976 for Hindi training, by deputing tribal children to the Hindi Vidya Pith in Bihar.
I am told that the 150 students who had undertaken this programme were appointed in Government schools.
This is a laudable effort towards national integration and should inspire us all.
Institutions are the strength of society and civilization.
They build a strong foundation of democracy.
The Ashram is an excellent institution which helps build the values necessary for a knowledge society.
The objective of freedom for India was never a mere transfer of power.
Jawaharlal Nehru after the Lahore Congress of 1930 described the concept of Purna Swaraj as meaning freedom from political slavery, economic bondage and cultural stagnation, not just a change of rulers.
This idea was instituted into the Constitution of India by Nehru and Dr BR Ambedkar.
The Indian Constitution has been described as a magna carta for socio-economic transformation.
The Directive Principles of the Constitution embody these ideas.
We still have some distance to go in achieving these goals.
Instead, it is empowerment backed by entitlement.
All of us will have to contribute to achieving the socio-economic transformation of India.
Many parts of the north east have not got the full benefit of the process of development that was initiated through our five year plans.
This deficiency should be made up through collective effort and contribution.
On the occasion of the Diamond Jubilee Celebration, I am happy to unveil the Diamond Jubilee Monument, and inaugurate the Girls Hostel and the Amity Hall.
I am hopeful of these new infrastructures serving the good purpose that it is intended to.
I look forward to their speedy completion.
I am confident that the Adimjati Shiksha Ashram will carry on its journey of limitless devotion and continue to be the centre of love, peace and harmony for all.
I congratulate the Ashram for completing 60 years of valuable service.
This convocation brings together learners from a large cross-section of society.
I congratulate all the students at the different regional centers of IGNOU who have assembled here to receive their degrees, diplomas and other awards.
The learners enrolled with this University represent knowledge seekers in conventional and innovative areas, and competency-based programmes.
The programme profile of the University is reflective of an innovative system of University education that promotes learning and encourages excellence in new fields of knowledge.
The demand for higher education in our country far exceeds its supply.
The density of educational institutions in India has no doubt increased from 10 to 14 institutions per 1,000 square kilometer during the Eleventh Plan period.
But educational institutions are still absent in many places.
This has resulted in a low enrolment rate in higher education.
7 per cent of those in the 18-24 years age group enter higher education in India, as compared to 21 per cent in Germany and 34 per cent in the US.
Increasing the reach of higher education to students, especially in remote areas, is critical to boosting the enrolment rate.
I am happy to know that IGNOU, in a span of 27 years, has become a pioneer for Open and Distance Learning in the country.
It meets the education demands of 30 lakh students in India and 43 other countries through a network of 67 regional centres, around 3,350 learner support centres and 82 overseas centres.
I compliment IGNOU for generating study material for 477 learning programmes offered through 21 Schools of Study.
IGNOU has demonstrated that quantitative gains in terms of enrolment can be meaningfully combined with quality education.
The enrolment to such programmes in India has increased from 27 lakh in 2006-07 to 42 lakh in 2011-12.
The establishment of IGNOU was a huge moment in the history of Indian education.
It has provided opportunities to a large number of people who were unable to access formal education or who wanted to diversify their academic portfolio or those who wanted to study for self-enrichment and up-gradation.
It has taken higher education to the masses and has learners from a wide range of age groups, including teenagers and working adults.
At the same time, IGNOU like any other institution also faces certain challenges.
These range from technical or managerial to structural and systemic.
For example, it needs to be ensured that students receive or access their materials within reasonable time.
There is need to harness technological advancements, particularly in IT and communication, to improve programmes and course content as well as cater to the growing size of student enrolment.
I am glad the University has established over a hundred video-conferencing centres and signed over 600 Memorandum of Understanding with other stakeholders to effectively deal with these challenges.
I hope the University will also make special provision to assist students from remote areas or with social or economic backwardness, make optimum use of technology.
IGNOU was started with a mandate of providing need-based education at different levels to all those who need it.
But, it must be kept in mind that needs keep changing over time.
The curriculum must reflect these changing needs and mores.
Knowledge creation is happening at such a tremendous pace that things become obsolete and even irrelevant before we realize it.
Continuous updating and review of existing material with new information is, therefore, absolutely essential.
Another important phenomenon which IGNOU should address is globalization.
Globalization has affected society in profound ways.
IGNOU with its expanding global presence, needs to develop an international perspective to its programmes.
Global studies could be combined with interdisciplinary perspectives.
IGNOU should be a vehicle for taking Indian and third world agendas to international arena with a view to influencing the global discourse.
At the national level IGNOU should also contribute to creating a cohesive polity where citizens participate in crafting a common future on an equal basis.
IGNOU should create interactive spaces which would allow students from across the nation to engage with and inspire each other.
IGNOU can thus synergize its students for nation-building.
The higher education sector must respond to this new opportunity.
Our universities should design programmes that assist such life long learners.
In the future, academic programmes that support multiple career goals will be more in demand.
Learning systems will have to adjust to the pace of the learner.
Learning is locating itself off campus, to the home, the workplace and the field.
For these set of emerging realities, open and distance learning is a perfect fit.
IGNOU and the network of State level Open Universities are a consortium addressing the knowledge requirements of the remotely-placed, disadvantaged, marginalized and deprived learners of the country.
The 1.5 lakh plus learners of the University who are receiving their degrees, diplomas and certificates today are torch bearers for promotion of development in different parts of the country.
Our country today has corporate leaders who can manage the development of Indian business into models of excellence.
Indian managers are recognized all over the world for their managerial capacity.
How change is managed will determine our progress.
The All India Management Association, formed in 1957, has been unstinted in its promotion of management excellence in the country.
It is true that our economic growth has declined during the last two years.
But let us not forget that in the decade 2003-04 to 2012-13, the average annual economic growth of our economy was a healthy 7.93 per cent.
Of this 10 year period, we have a block of 5 years, from 2008-09 to 2012-13, when the world economic growth was extremely sluggish, fragile and uncertain.
Though our GDP growth in 2012-13 at 5.0 per cent is the lowest in 10 years, it is much higher than the G-7 countries.
Towards this paradigm, we have progressively liberalized our trade and investment sectors.
As per an international survey, India does well in parameters like Getting Credit and Protecting Investors.
But in other important sectors such as Starting a Business, Dealing with Construction Permits, Paying Taxes and Enforcing Contracts, we lag behind many of our competitors.
It is gratifying to note that a Cabinet Committee on Investment has been constituted to monitor and review major projects in respect of various licenses and approvals for their time-bound implementation.
Deficits should be brought down so that greater proportion of savings is available for investment.
In 2011-12, the enrolment to commerce and management streams in the country was 34 lakh.
This has to rise and for that more institutes for management education is necessary.
It is gratifying to note that 7 new Indian Institutes of Management were set up during the Eleventh Plan period.
The private sector should also play a pivotal role and mark their presence as a major producer of managerial manpower.
Our research and innovation efforts must aim at technology up-gradation to simplify production processes, improve quality and seek efficiency gains.
The Industry must partner with the academic and research institutions to develop solutions of wide utility for the market and the common man.
Only one in 50 patent applications in the world is filed in India.
Our patent regime has the difficult task to sustain encouragement to innovation on the one hand and maintain market competition, and ensure accessibility and affordability, on the other.
We also require the Indian industry to act as a catalyst for deepening our growth process.
Our industry should aim at inclusion of all as participants in economic development.
I am sure they will ignite the minds of other managers and entrepreneurs to think big towards nation building.
I also wish the All India Management Association all success in their future endeavours.
Thank you.
I am delighted to be here today to address the 10th Convocation of the National Institute of Technology (NIT), Kurukshetra.
I congratulate the graduating students on this momentous day of their lives.
I compliment the Institute for completing 50 years of rendering engineering education in the country.
I am told that as part of the Golden Jubilee celebrations, the Institute is organizing seminars, workshops, lectures and training programs in the emerging areas of engineering and technology, science, humanities and management.
NIT, Kurukshetra, has built for itself a reputation for delivering quality professional education in the country.
It stands tall amongst the technical institutions of higher learning.
Over the last five decades, it has produced outstanding engineers who have become an asset for the profession and the country.
The dedicated service and tireless efforts of the faculty and staff of the Institute, in pursuing excellence in teaching and research is laudable.
The contribution of education to the development of a nation is second to none.
The evolving demographic profile of our country, with two-third of our population expected to be in the working age group by 2025, presents us an opportunity for high economic growth and prosperity.
This demographic dividend is ours for the taking, but for that, the youth must be qualified and trained to participate in national progress.
As is well known, India is poised to be an economic power.
In terms of purchasing power parity, the size of our economy is the third largest in the world.
A growth rate of 9 per cent per year has been envisaged during the Twelfth Five Year Plan period of 2012 to 2017.
Such scales of economic expansion need several enabling factors prominent among them being education.
We have, over time, created an infrastructure of good educational institutions for imparting quality education at all levels.
In the higher education sector, India is endowed with 659 degree awarding institutions and 33,023 colleges.
The number of Indian Institutes of Technology has increased from 7 in 2006-07 to 15 in 2011-12.
The enrolment to higher education institutions in the country has similarly increased, from 1.39 crores in 2006-07 to 2.18 crores in 2011-12.
Engineering comprised 13 per cent of the total enrolment in 2006-07.
This figure has since increased to 25 per cent.
The growth rate of enrolment in Engineering, which was close to 25 per cent annually during the Eleventh Plan period, is the highest for any field of study.
These include the establishment of more Central Universities, greater emphasis on technical education and distance learning, academic reforms, interest subsidy on education loans, establishment of innovation universities, expansion of existing institutions and a focus on better quality in research, infrastructure, faculty and curriculum content.
The strategy gives due emphasis to greater outreach and more opportunities for all sections of our society.
Governance reforms and restructuring is also a priority.
Our institutes of higher learning continue to be challenged by problems of quality.
An international survey indicated that there is not a single Indian university amongst the top 200 universities in the world.
This calls for drastic action to reform the way education is imparted in our universities and academic institutes.
A culture of excellence should be embedded in the thought process of our higher education providers.
Quality, affordability and accessibility should become the mainstay of our higher education system.
Wide regional variations should not be allowed to persist.
We must take higher education, including technical education, to the doorstep of our people by innovations in the delivery system.
Shortage of faculty is assuming serious proportions across all types of higher education institutions.
Existing vacancies must be filled up quickly.
Along side, technology should be marshalled for learning and collaborative information sharing.
In this regard, the facilities extended by the National Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology should be utilized to the fullest extent.
For instance, important lectures could be shared with students belonging to geographically-distant institutions.
Unless our teachers are up-to-date with the latest information in their respective academic disciplines, they will not be able to disseminate knowledge of contemporary relevance to their students.
Our universities and institutes must encourage and facilitate their teachers participation in international seminars, refresher courses and project work.
Benefits of wider perspective and knowledge reciprocity would flow automatically.
Every academic institute must recognize their outstanding teachers who have inspired the young minds to gather knowledge beyond text books.
Such teachers are catalysts for holistic learning and new thinking.
Topics of national relevance such as water, environment, health, education and urbanization require in-depth analysis and research.
Our institutes of higher learning must provide an academic framework that will facilitate a better understanding of these issues by our policy makers.
In a world of depleting natural resources, future growth will have to be secured by innovation and constant technology up-gradation.
In 2011, 42,000 patent applications were filed in our country compared to over 5 lakh applications filed each in China and US.
This number will increase if the process of innovation is made a permanent feature in our institutions of learning.
Our universities, engineering colleges and research and development centres should be the hotbeds of innovation.
Setting up more incubation parks, building linkages with grass-root innovators, enhancing the number of research fellowships, and driving inter-disciplinary research are some of the immediate measures required to be taken.
In our engineering colleges and technical institutes, there is also need to proactively pursue the scaling up of research in cutting edge technologies such as nanotechnology, biotechnology, embedded system design and technologies for sustainable development like renewable energy.
Some studies have shown how alumni interest in the affairs of academic institution has done wonders.
Alumni are associated in the affairs of an overwhelming majority of the top American universities like Harvard University.
I am confident that the alumni of NIT, Kurukshetra, would also engage themselves fruitfully to the cause of this Institution.
I am happy to note that NIT, Kurukshetra, has made notable progress by establishing dedicated schools of post graduate studies and research.
I am confident your endeavour to establish closer research and development linkages with reputed national laboratories and organizations like Defence Research and Development Organization and Council of Scientific and Industrial Research will succeed in developing useful and frontier technology.
Talent in academic and research positions in our academic institutions are difficult to retain due to lack of adequate flexibility in our systems.
Our system must be geared to discourage any loss of intellectual capital and at the same time welcome scholars overseas including NRI and Persons of Indian origin to return to the country.
Such an initiative will enable transmission of ideas and new methods of teaching and research from abroad to India.
Our pool of qualified manpower will be the backbone of this new age.
I hope NIT Kurukshetra will lead the way in transforming domain knowledge and skill into new competitive technologies for national reliance.
I am sure the young men and women graduating today will face challenges in their life with confidence and bring sincerity, devotion and professionalism in all aspects of their professional work.
Tolerance, discipline, humanism, and service to the society with all humility should be the guiding philosophy for all those who graduate from here.
Carry this message with you always.
Be just and fear none.
Fear only to do that which is ill and ignoble.
Stand up for right.
Love to serve your fellow-men.
Love the motherland.
Promote public weal.
Do good wherever you get a chance for it.
It gives me great pleasure to be here today, in the land of the Mahabharata and the Bhagavad Gita.
It is also not very common for universities to select such a complex and challenging topic for the seminar.
Let me congratulate the Vice Chancellor and his team for this decision.
The second centre of importance, the Oriental Institute, was established in 1893 by the then Maharaja of Baroda.
The Institute is credited with having published original works on various issues relating to Hindu Law, Buddhism and Jainism.
Several other Indology institutes have been established since then.
The Theosophical Society established in Madras in 1882 is another such centre which has done original research in Indology.
The Theosophical Society studies on Indology received an impetus with the arrival of Annie Besant in 1893 to work for the organisation.
She authored many books on Indian society and its culture giving a new dimension to Indology studies.
Soon, interest on Indology had spread throughout Europe primarily in France and Germany.
Despite the increasing interest in Indology, it failed to gain greater momentum both in India and abroad.
In India, it is attributable to the lack of employment opportunities of those engaged in Indology and the influence of western ideology.
Consequently, though rich in literature, Indology has not been able to withstand the domination of western thoughts and theories.
It resulted in the domination of English and research based on western philosophy making it unidimensional.
In Europe, many saw Indology as relating to the pre-history period thereby degrading its relevance.
Consequently, the advancement made by India in the field of medicine, mathematics and astronomy received inadequate attention.
But in a world focused on materialism and where many see the end justifying the means, the study of Indian culture can give an alternate model.
Our cultural history is rich.
The wealth of our works stand bequeathed to the benefit of this modern world.
The underlying moral teachings in Bhagavad Gita, for instance, can emphasize the need to adhere to righteus path even in the face of adversity.
At the beginning of the war between the Pandavas and Kauravas, Lord Shri Krishna delivered the celestial sermon of Bhagavad Gita to an ambivalent Arjuna and showed him the path of righteousness and the true duty of a warrior.
It made him conscious of the compelling obligation to perform his duty burying his personal interests.
Its message is truly universal and if followed can prevent many of the conflicts that the world today is forced to come to terms with.
Our languages and literature are our shared heritage.
Classical Indian languages like Sanskrit and Tamil, with rich original literary and grammatical traditions, are amongst the longest surviving languages in the world.
The wealth of information and advice contained in the works in several Indian languages and Indian philosophy can provide answers to both individuals and nations.
Dharma is both a law and a duty in itself.
Anything that sustains social order and accentuates moral development of an individual is dharma.
Its observance guarantees peace and harmony to all.
Artha is a basic necessity of life.
The need for economic well-being to lead a decent and fulfilling life is embedded in it.
Spiritual life finds full scope only in communities of certain degree of freedom from sordidness.
Lives that are strained and starved cannot be religious except in rudimentary way.
Realisation of this reality would help reduce inequality among people.
We must bear in mind that in the long-standing Indian tradition, artha or wealth has never been an end but a means.
Wealth should be a medium to fulfill the basic needs rather than a goal to be pursued.
The pursuit of wealth should not blind the seeker to the righteousness path.
If accumulation of material wealth is made the singular objective of life, one is in the danger of being trapped in the vicious cycle of pleasure and pain.
Realisation of this universal truth would moderate the mindless pursuit of wealth and imbibe in both individuals and nations the need for philanthropy.
At the international level, the world appears to be enamoured by the concept of realpolitik.
But it cannot bring lasting peace but instability.
Notions of international brotherhood or Vishwa Bandhutva that are embedded in Indian culture and tradition can provide impetus to a world where nations are threatening each other with nuclear annihilation.
The maxim Vasudeva kutumbakam instructs us to treat the whole world like a family.
Our traditional understanding calls for the essential fraternity and friendship amongst societies and countries.
The modern world is locked in many conflicts.
Our lives are characterized by aspiration, competition and struggle.
But in the necessity to survive and race to the top, there are many who throw moral values to the winds.
In the battle, everyone is overcome by anxiety and disquiet.
Its result is illusory.
The ancient scriptures and literatures contain valuable wisdom that denotes the true meaning of notions such as life, happiness, peace, prosperity, duty and obligation.
These are time-insured and relevant to the contemporary world.
To find answers to the doubts and questions on life principles, we should have a proper re-look at our ancient texts.
To equip ourselves to filter the stress of mundane life, reliance on the valuable knowledge in our scriptures is necessary.
Great men and thinkers of the nineteenth century have contributed towards reformation of society and upliftment of the human mind.
Socio-religious movements like Arya Samaj, Brahma Samaj, Prarthana Samaj and Theosophical Society had lent a direction that was new for that age but old in respect of our ancient philosophical understanding.
The time has come once again to propagate to the world the values and lessons contained in our rich traditions.
The importance of imparting moral lessons to children should be rightly understood.
The University Education Commission of 1948-49 under Dr. S. Radhakrishnan had recommended imparting moral education in our universities and colleges.
Our institutes of learning should offer courses on life management to orient the students with the diverse perspectives of life to give them a different world view of modernity.
I am hopeful that seminars such as the one being conducted here would take the imperative of teaching and understanding of Indology to the centre stage of national discourse.
Kurukshetra University enjoys a reputation for imparting quality education conforming to global standards.
I am told that it has produced nine Arjuna Awardees, two Dronacharya Awardees and one Major Dhyan Chand Awardee.
I applaud the efforts of the Kurukshetra University for this initiative.
I am delighted to join you for the inauguration of the India Water Week 2013 being organized by the Ministry of Water Resources.
It is a privilege to be a part of this august gathering comprising renowned public figures, policy makers, experts and professionals.
The severe drought in some parts of our country, particularly Maharashtra, is a matter of grave concern.
The increasing occurrence of droughts and floods in India has underlined the need to find solutions to improve the management of water resources.
Our endowment of water resource is disproportionately less than our population.
India is home to 17 per cent of the world population but possess only 4 per cent of its renewable water resource.
Due to population expansion, increasing urbanization and the necessity of high economic growth through rapid industrialization, availability of water resource is conspicuous by its competing demands.
The per capita availability of water has reduced significantly from 1,816 cubic meter in 2001 to 1,545 cubic meter in 2011.
The available water must be managed judiciously to meet the twin burden of population growth and economic development.
Conservation, balanced distribution and reclamation of used water are essential cogs in the wheel of water management.
Various studies have indicated the adverse impact of climate change on the hydrologic cycle leading to variations in precipitation.
This has often resulted in occurrence of flood in some areas and drought in others.
Climate change also has the potential to affect ground water by reducing its table and quality.
As part of the National Action Plan on Climate Change, the National Water Mission was launched in 2011 with the objectives of water conservation, minimization of wastage and equitable distribution.
Our efforts must be directed at mitigating the regional imbalance in water availability.
Equitable allocation of water across the country could be made possible by inter-basin water transfer.
But for that, the environmental and socio-economic impact should be studied before such an initiative is envisaged.
We must also strive to achieve equity in the allocation of water between urban and rural areas.
This would negate the potential for any social conflict.
Our cities and industrial townships should devise measures for minimal waste of water.
Losses due to transportation and leakage should be minimized by developing sources of water in close proximity to the point of demand.
Water conservation should be accorded the high priority that it deserves.
I am happy to note that the Birth Anniversary of our former Prime Minister, Late Shrimati Indira Gandhi, was also observed as the Water Conservation Day last year.
This is a good initiative.
We must strengthen our data base on the quantum and quality of ground water so that our policy interventions have much greater chance of success.
Rain water harvesting should be popularized by dovetailing existing rural development schemes like Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee scheme.
Our initiatives at integrated watershed development should be aimed at increasing the soil moisture, reducing the sediment yield and improving land and water productivity.
Usable water is a scarce commodity today.
Hence, the pricing mechanism should not only reflect the cost but also act as an incentive for saving and disincentive for wastage.
All points of water supply, especially in the urban areas, should be metered to boost conservation and ensure recovery of user charge.
The role of water users associations should be strengthened by giving them adequate powers for collection of water charges and management of the water distribution system.
Water Regulatory Authorities could be envisaged in every state for tariff fixation to increase transparency in the management of water use.
Water management in this sector is therefore crucial for overall sustainability of our water resource.
The 3 R strategy of reduce, recycle and reuse must find application in our farmlands.
Our irrigation system should encourage judicious use of water.
Micro irrigation techniques like drip and sprinkler, and adoption of cropping pattern suited to natural resource endowments should mark our approach to water-saving in agriculture.
Studies have brought out the positive linkage between the level of economic development and adequacy of water-related infrastructure such as water supply, sanitation, wastewater treatment for majority of urban populace and planned use of wastewater.
Wastewater treatment technology has developed due to the significant contribution of scientific and engineering fields.
This has led to the growing use of wastewater in agriculture worldwide.
However, in terms of area irrigated by untreated wastewater, India ranks third in the world.
Our citizens should have access to safe drinking water, whose benefit in terms of human health has been well documented.
The provision of safe drinking water has become a serious development initiative around the globe.
From 76 per cent in 1990, the proportion of global population with safe drinking water source has increased to 89 per cent in 2010.
The number of people benefitted has increased over this period by 2 billion, of which our country accounts for more than one fourth.
But there is still a significant portion of humanity who remains denied of access to this basic necessity.
The reach of the poor to safe drinking water can be enhanced by developing mid-market technologies that can deliver affordable water treatment devices.
Micro finance institutions can be engaged to acquire devices and encourage shared access to safe drinking water.
Many of our rural areas are bereft of basic water infrastructure requiring women to spend a considerable amount of time and energy in collection of water, thereby depriving them from pursuing income generating activities.
Spreading the network of water infrastructure to all underserved areas would therefore be an exercise in rural rejuvenation.
Our strategies geared to better management of water resource should seek the active involvement of the community.
The conviction of the end user is not only a necessity for successful implementation but should be a development objective in itself.
I am hopeful that the India Water Week 2013 would be able to provide meaningful solutions and guide our approach to water management.
I also expect the Water Expo 2013 to showcase exciting technological possibilities for sustaining this vital natural resource.
I congratulate the Ministry of Water Resources for taking this timely initiative.
I also applaud the other Ministries, particularly Agriculture, Environment and Forests, and Drinking Water and Sanitation, for extending their partnership.
It is indeed a privilege for me to be present amidst you all for the Golden Jubilee celebrations of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI).
I am especially delighted at the opportunity to deliver the 14th Memorial Lecture of Late Dharmanath Prasad Kohli, a visionary who was the founder Director of CBI.
Late Shri Kohli, an illustrious member of Indian Civil Service, played a definitive role in shaping the character and identity of the organization.
The stature that CBI has gained over the decades is an eloquent testimony to the distinguished services rendered by him and all the directors who succeeded him and made their own contribution in building up this unique organization.
I could not have thought of a more appropriate subject.
The term, Good Governance, appeared in the development lexicon about two decades back.
The concept has today gained greater importance and relevance than ever before because of the increasing recognition of its inseparable link to social welfare and public good.
It has become the key concept in development philosophy.
Countries too are evaluated on the basis of the quality of governance that they may have succeeded in establishing.
The concept of Police State long ago was replaced by the concept of Welfare State.
Lack of good governance has been identified as the root cause of many of the serious deficiencies in society.
It robs the citizenry of their security, and their social and economic rights.
Though there is no exhaustive definition of the term good governance, its underlying import and idea is wide.
It encompasses virtually all aspects of human interaction.
It is equally relevant at the local and national level as it is at the international level.
Every organisation within a society has a decisive role in promoting good governance.
These roles may vary depending on the form of structure and institutions that each society may have evolved.
Good governance is critically dependent on the existence of some fundamental pre-requisites.
In brief, good governance means the existence of an elaborate architecture that has the good of the people as their only focus.
Good governance should create a conducive and enabling environment for the people to pursue their happiness.
These basic principles of good governance were incorporated in the Constitution by our founding fathers.
The objective of establishing a welfare state found expression in it.
Our Constitution outlines the values that should be fundamental in the governance in our country.
From 3.5 per cent growth rate per annum during the First Five Year Plan period, we achieved 8 per cent per annum during the Eleventh Five Year Plan period.
The Green Revolution in the 1960s made our country self-sufficient in food grains.
We have also reduced the incidence of poverty.
Today India is the third largest economy in the world in purchasing power parity terms.
We can certainly be proud of these achievements.
But it is equally true that much more remains to be done.
The challenges to our governance systems are reflected in some important international analyses which are mainly dependent on the social index.
We are at the cross roads of transformation and cannot afford to lose the momentum of change.
There are several challenges we face and we should face them with determination and conviction.
And, at the root of them is the issue of governance.
We have achieved remarkable progress in several of the grids that constitute good governance.
In some, our achievements have been greater than others.
There is still immense scope to better our participatory decision making structure, improve the application of rule of law, enhance transparency, increase accountability, promote greater equity and inclusiveness and improve consensus based approach.
For the sake of brevity, I will elaborate on some of the few grids.
The incidence of poverty is still around 30 per cent and it is not something that we can live with.
Statistics of economic progress will count for nothing if we are not able to uplift the marginalised sections of the society.
Our growth, therefore must have to be inclusive and sustainable.
Inclusiveness calls for equity in access to basic needs like education and healthcare.
Our efforts should be directed at making the entire population literate.
I am confident that the flagship schemes in the education sector, such as Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, Mid-Day Meal Scheme and Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan would be addressing many of our problems.
Affordable healthcare should be our priority.
Many people in this country are forced into poverty due to high costs of medical treatment.
Another important aspect in changing our development paradigm is to be noticed today.
The new terminology is empowerment through entitlement which is backed by legal enactments.
We have adopted a rights-based approach to our development process.
The Rights to Education, Employment and Food Security are the core of this development strategy.
I wish this development strategy should be implemented fully.
To help empower our marginalized sections, we gave them the right to employment and education.
We piloted legislations such as Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 and the Right to Education Act, 2009.
The process of enacting a law to provide food security to people is also in the process of completion.
It would help our citizens, especially the poor and needy, to easily access several benefits and services more efficiently.
Our delivery systems need mending and only good governance can provide an answer to the problem.
If what is meant for the poor does not reach them in the proportion it is meant to, then corruption and inefficiency are its two main causes.
Corruption is a threat to the democratic fabric of our country.
It would frustrate the efforts to bring equity to all its citizens.
I am happy to note that in the recent past, several steps have been taken to reaffirm our commitment to bringing more transparency in governance.
Some of the steps taken include the ratification of the United Nations Convention against Corruption in 2011, membership of the Financial Action Task Force since 2010, introduction of the Prevention of Bribery of Foreign Public Officials and Officials of Public International Organizations Bill 2011, and initiation of a proposal to make bribery in private sector a criminal offence by bringing an amendment in the Indian Penal Code.
At the root of poor governance is our lethargy for change, whether it is in the implementation of schemes or adherence to values.
I do not have to remind you how grievously hurt the nation was when a young woman, the symbol of an aspiring nation, lost her life in the brutal assault in India in December last year.
As I had said earlier, I repeat and I do believe that it is time to reset our moral compass.
The police and investigative organisations can play a crucial role in creating conditions that could engender societal changes.
An alert police force and investigative agency can ensure that no crime goes unpunished.
It is important to ensure speedy and thorough investigation of allegations.
The prosecution should also be speedy so that the guilty are punished without delay.
This would enhance the deterrent value of punishment.
It would improve responsiveness, one of the most important features of good governance.
To conclude, let me reiterate that good governance should be our unwavering goal.
It holds the key to sustainable development, inclusiveness and economic progress.
Let us, therefore, rededicate ourselves to the achievement of this noble objective.
I congratulate all the medal winners and their family members who I am confident will continue to serve this nation with devotion, professionalism and foresight.
I also wish the CBI every success in their future endeavours.
I congratulate all the past and present officers and staff of CBI whose untiring efforts and single-minded devotion have made it not only the premier investigating agency in the country but perhaps the most sought after agency for investigation by every section of the society.
To sustain a long voyage of 151 days at sea, solo, non stop unassisted and sailing through some of the most treacherous oceans of the world, is a remarkable feat.
The solitude factor alone is such that being thousands of kms away from the nearest land, there would be very little chance of help or rescue, if something went wrong.
His epic voyage has placed our nation into the ranks of a few select countries whose citizens have been successful and less than 100 individuals in braving such an arduous voyage.
I would also like to felicitate parents of Lt Cdr Abhilash Tomy and, the mentor of the project VAdm (Retd) MP Awati.
I would also like to congratulate Mr Ratnakar Dandekar who has built this wonderful boat in India.
I am told that the expedition has generated enormous media attention and created fervour amongst the youth for seafaring and Oceanic adventures.
I am also given to understand that the internet postings of the Skipper on his blog and Facebook pages have been keenly followed by admirers from all age groups.
Sponsorship of terrorism through non-state actors, and across the seas, is a matter of deep concern to the entire nation.
Historically, India has always stood for peace.
Our commitment to peaceful co-existence stems not from weakness but is based on a mature understanding that peace alone can help a nation achieve its objectives of social and economic development.
Our resolve to achieve sustained high growth can be realized only if our maritime frontiers and assets are safe, stable and act as enablers.
It is indeed a matter of great pride that the Indian Navy continues to discharge its responsibilities with professional excellence and élan, whilst simultaneously building bridges of friendship and goodwill across the oceans.
In this regard, the selfless service, dedication and professionalism of our men and women in white are indeed praiseworthy.
It is indeed a pleasant occasion for me to be here today for the presentation of the National Awards for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs), which is an important event in the calendar of business awards in India.
The MSME sector is characterized by its heterogeneity.
It is diverse in terms of size, technology level, location, and product range that spans from grass-root village industries to sophisticated units producing auto components, micro-processors, electronic components and electro-medical devices.
As MSME units have a high degree of geographic dispersion, their development assumes great significance for an equitable and inclusive growth which is the ultimate objective of our economy.
To extend an enabling infrastructure for MSME units, reliance on industrial clusters has been found prudent in many countries.
By providing shared access to amenities like testing centres, utilities, roads, security, effluent treatment, training of workers, and marketing, clusters can provide substantial benefits in terms of technology absorption, efficiency enhancement and growth for these units.
I am told that the Cluster Development Programme of the Government has been active in building capacity, upgrading infrastructure and setting up common facility centres.
I am confident of this scheme fulfilling its objective of bringing sustainable growth to this sector.
The National Manufacturing Policy, 2011 has envisaged the setting up of dedicated National Investment and Manufacturing Zones to bring together modern infrastructure, technology, skill development centres, and state-of-the-art connectivity to become the nuclei of manufacturing growth.
I expect the manufacturing MSME units to take full advantage of this initiative.
The growth potential of the MSME units should not be impeded by lack of access to financial resources.
There is a need to increase the reach and coverage of financial institutions by expanding branch network to locations near industrial clusters.
Our Capital Market is an important resource-raising medium for our business.
The Small and Medium Enterprises Exchange platform launched by the National Stock Exchange and the BSE would allow small and medium enterprises to access the capital market to raise necessary resources.
This will also help diversify risk in these enterprises by widening the investor base.
The potential of knowledge-based industries in India is very high.
To facilitate their growth, increased access to alternative sources of capital like private equity, venture capital and angel funds should be made possible.
It is gratifying to note that our efforts at easing the flow of credit to the MSME sector have continued unabated.
Innovation and technology provides the competitive edge that our industrial sector at large and the MSME sector in particular should not be deprived of.
We must aim at developing relevant technologies to re-engineer manufacturing processes, reduce costs, improve turnaround time and enhance product quality.
For that, the industry and academic and research institutions should collaborate to identify and find solutions to existing technology gaps.
Tool Rooms and Technology Development Centres have been found useful in providing technology and design support to MSME units.
There is a need to replicate such efforts.
This decade is the decade of innovation.
Our drive towards innovation must benefit the bottom of the socio-economic pyramid.
There are many cutting edge innovations that, due to lack of technological and commercial support, remain denied of development into marketable products.
Institutional mentoring of grass root innovators would go a long way in taking the benefits of technology closer to the people.
By 2025, two-third Indians will be in the working age bracket.
This is both a challenge and an opportunity.
We have to gainfully employ our working population to ensure that their contribution to national progress is unearthed to the fullest extent.
To stimulate employment creation, healthy industrial relations and capacity building mechanisms are a must.
Our strategies must focus on up-gradation of our technical institutes, both in terms of quality and quantity, setting up of more technical institutes to cater to the increasing demand, and skill development of our manpower to equip them with the relevant expertise and knowhow.
Our labour laws should be able to address the contemporary business models and reflect the pragmatic rights and obligations of the employer and the employee.
Our MSME units can prosper only if there is a concerted effort at widening the market for their products.
On account of the scale of operation, most of these units are not capable of individual initiative in marketing, brand building and promotion.
The Public Procurement Policy for Micro and Small Enterprises 2012, which mandates Central Government Ministries and Public Sector Undertakings to procure at least 20 per cent of their annual purchases from the micro and small enterprises, would address the marketing concerns of this sector to a great extent.
Close to 95 per cent of the MSME units are micro enterprises that employ around 69 per cent of the total MSME workforce.
Their partnership in creating a friendly business environment, especially by skill development, product promotion, and technology development, will pave the way for our MSME units to compete successfully with the best in the world.
I once again take this opportunity of congratulating all the award winners and hope that their success would inspire millions of small entrepreneurs working diligently through the length and breadth of the country.
First of all my greetings to all the young and budding scientists and INSPIRE Awardees who have come here from various parts of the country.
Dear young students, I see the future of India in you, it is for sure that the shape of India to come would be determined by youth of the nation.
Science and Technology and Innovation will form the new grammar of development.
My dear children, what has differentiated the post-industrial world from the previous centuries is Science and Technology.
The way we live on earth has been significantly transformed by Science and Technology.
In Twenty-first century, those nations which use Science and Technology are likely to emerge as global powers.
Knowledge is also likely to emerge as the next driver of change in the world.
Many of you will be driver of change, which will happen in India and the World.
India with a strong scientific and technical manpower has an opportunity to become a major knowledge power in the years to come.
To make this dream a reality, we have to invest in research and development.
Best investment that a Nation could make is in her youth power.
To capitalize the advantages of large demographic dividend and huge scientific talent pool, we have announced the Science, Technology and Innovation Policy 2013.
The INSPIRE scheme will act as a catalyst in implementation of the newly announced policy.
My dear children, you are the future of India.
Therefore, nation has chosen to invest into you.
Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research (INSPIRE) is one of the significant investments of India into the youth of the nation.
I congratulate the Ministry for taking the initiative.
I am told that all of you who have assembled here today are selected from a group of over 5.2 lakh children who received INSPIRE Awards.
I am particularly happy to note that about 48% of the INSPIRE awardees are girls out of the total 8 lakh awards sanctioned since inception.
I am informed that, you all have participated in the National Level Project Exhibition Competition and selected for State, Regional and National level prizes.
You all have crossed many levels to reach at this stage.
I congratulate each one of you individually and also as a group of young people, who are likely to write a new destiny for this nation.
I have been told that some of your project entries are so amazing that the Department is processing a few of them for patenting.
You have demonstrated interesting potentials.
Some of you could become scientists, engineers, doctors and professional researchers.
You could discover new facets of science, the way C.V. Raman, J. C. Bose, S. N. Bose and Srinivasa Ramanujan did.
Discovery processes in Science would remain one of the most celebrated activities of human kind.
India is a developing country and we need solutions to some of the most challenging problems of the society.
We need to find new technologies for meeting our food, energy, water and healthcare requirements.
India would need a new brand of solutions designers and this is where you all can contribute.
Let us take the example of Edison.
He invented a new way to make electrical bulb which would give light.
His invention has changed the lives of people all over the world and today we cannot think of life without electricity.
We can list innumerable number of inventions which have transformed, the way we work and live in the modern society.
INSPIRE aims to help the youth of this country to become scientists and researchers.
India has started to invest significantly into Research and Development as well as education sectors.
Several new academic and research institutions have been established during the last ten years.
There will be new opportunities for talented youth to become researchers.
Our industrial and agriculture sectors also have started to invest more into research and development.
World over, Indian talent pool is respected.
Several Multi National Companies have established their global R&D centers in India.
In a way, R&D capability of India is just opening up for planned investments.
These developments open up new opportunities and challenges to those who can dream, and sky is the limit for achievement.
Sir C. V. Raman won the Nobel Prize in Science for his work done in India.
There have been people like S. Chandrasekhar, Har Gobind Khorana and more recently Venki Ramakrishnan, who have won Nobel Prizes for their work done abroad.
I am sure that the young scientists present here will transform India into a league of nations, which proudly owns patents of new discoveries and products and in the process, making India emerge as a knowledge economy with its own solutions to its necessities.
Scientific creativity blooms early in life.
I am happy to note that you all have started on your creative projects at the right age.
You will be happy to know that our own C.V. Raman wrote his first paper when he was 18, Ramanujan started his own research by the time he was 17 and Astrophysicist Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar's Nobel Prize winning work was done when he was 19 or 20 years old.
The list is long, but the trend is very clear.
You all have shown the potential of a scientist.
It is the responsibility of the society and all of us to ensure that we as a nation capitalize on your scientific capabilities.
I am happy that the Ministry of Science and Technology, in collaboration with the schools spread all over the country, is engaged in this task which will be further streamlined with the e-management of INSPIRE Awards scheme.
This is only one way of engaging the creative minds of the society.
We have to find many more ways to ensure that no creative idea in this country is left without being nurtured.
This will ensure that we as a country are self reliant for our scientific and technological requirements and in the process we emerge as exporter of knowledge based products.
In the recently concluded Conference of Vice Chancellors of Central Universities at Rashtrapati Bhavan, I have asked for setting up the National Innovation Clubs and linking up the grassroots innovators to the Central Universities.
This is for converting grassroots innovations into value added technologies.
During my visits to these Central Universities I will have the opportunity of meeting the regional innovators to see that the linkages between the innovators and the Central Universities are well established for the benefit of the society and the nation as a whole.
Once again I would like to congratulate the INSPIRE awardees for their talent, hard work and devotion towards science.
I am sure with your dedication and hard work, you can achieve what you aspire to have.
This Conference, I believe, could not have been organised at a more appropriate time.
There could be no second opinion on the critical role that education plays in the development of a nation.
It is the most powerful tool that can spawn societal changes and transform the economic fortunes of a country.
There are several important reasons why we need to focus our attention on the educational sector.
I hardly need to emphasize that we have a young population and the demographic profile of our country can be a boon.
It would be a boon if we are able to harness their potential.
But our failure to do so and channelize their productive energies may visit us with terrible negative consequences.
These challenges can be daunting.
By the year 2020, the average age of an India will be 29 years, which will be much lower than average age of 40 years in the US, 46 years in Japan and 47 years in Europe.
Over two-third Indians will be of working age by 2025.
These statistics make it imperative for us to focus on the educational needs of our young population.
We must recognize that the demographic dividend can only be reaped if the young population is provided higher education and training in vocational skills.
At the end of the Eleventh Five Year Plan period, India had 659 degree awarding institutions and 33,023 colleges.
These numbers are indeed impressive but many more would have to be established.
They are required to meet the growing demands for higher education, especially in the rural areas in the country.
There are several areas in the country far removed from any college or university.
This has led to the low rate of enrolment in higher education.
Only around 7 per cent of those aged between 18-24 years join higher education in India, while it is 21 per cent in Germany and 34 per cent in the US.
Increased access would not only help expand the base of the educational pyramid, but also promote inclusiveness.
It can also be promoted by making education affordable to the marginalized sections of the society.
Student aid programmes like scholarships, education loans and self-help schemes should therefore be liberalized for deserving students.
We lack universities that can provide quality education that meet global benchmarks.
It is a matter of concern that there is not a single Indian university in the top 200 universities in the world as per an international survey of universities.
This position is not at all acceptable.
This calls for serious introspection.
With educational standards that fall short of international benchmarks, India would be grievously handicapped in this competitive world.
We cannot wait any longer before we take remedial action.
We do not have the luxury of time.
We must promote a culture of excellence in our educational system.
I can suggest a concrete step in this direction which would be to identify one department in every university and transform into a Centre of Excellence.
To achieve this, the Ministry of Human Resource Development, the University Grants Commission and the Universities would have to work together in close collabration.
Amongst the academic challenges that we face, is the large number of vacancies in the Universities.
In Central Universities alone, the vacancy of teachers is around an unacceptable level of 38 per cent.
This has to change.
We cannot expect to impart quality education without qualified teachers who are most equipped to provide guidance to students and encourage research.
For this, the Ministry of Human Resource Development, the University Grants Commission and Universities and all stakeholders should work out a common approach.
The focus should be on quality, affordability and accessibility, the three cornerstones of higher education.
The private sector should be encouraged to play a larger role in our educational system.
Some of the top universities of the world have been built on the initiative of the private sector.
In India, the private sector has left its mark in several key sectors like health, transport and financial services.
I see no reason why the Indian private sector cannot replicate its efforts in the higher education sector as well.
But, care should be taken to ensure that there is no dilution in educational standards.
We should also be able to harness the power of technology to promote education.
Classroom teaching in one university could be transmitted for the benefit of a wider student population in other universities using modern technology.
For instance, lectures of eminent professors could be transmitted to educational institutions situated away from the main towns and cities using the facilities offered by the National Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology.
National Knowledge Network, which aims at the connection of knowledge generating institutions through high speed broad band network has made substantial progress.
We have been able to link 955 out of the 1,500 institutions to this Network.
The balance one-third institutions should be connected on priority basis to bring its benefits to remote areas.
About 10 to 20 such teachers who can spark the student minds to seek knowledge beyond the text book could be identified.
When such teachers interact with their peers and with students, it will result in the qualitative improvement in the capacity to impart and absorb knowledge.
The progress of nations will be determined in large measure by their capacity to innovate.
Though Indians represent about 17 per cent of the global population, only 2 per cent of the patent applications in the world in 2011 were filed in India.
In the same year, the number of patent applications filed in India was around 42,000.
Universities and Research Centres should become fertile grounds for innovation.
Setting up industry incubation parks, enhancing the coverage of research students by fellowships, promoting inter-disciplinary research through inter-university and intra-university collaboration, and empowering our centres of excellence would be important steps in this direction.
We should erect innovative structures to encourage and retain intellectual resources in our academic and research centres.
Indian scholars working overseas in important research and teaching positions should also be encouraged to take up short-term assignments in Indian Universities.
This would facilitate dissemination of knowledge and cross-fertilization of ideas.
In our country, there are many innovations that take place at the grass-root levels.
But for the nation to derive benefit from them, we need to make them commercially marketable.
Our universities should be equipped to encourage grass-root innovators and play the role of a mentor.
With a view to evolving a time-bound action plan and make innovative changes in the higher education sector, a conference of the Vice Chancellors of the Central Universities was organized in the Rashtrapati Bhavan in February of this year.
The Conference identified certain immediate, short-term and medium-term measures that would need to be taken to reform the education system.
The changes are being worked upon by the Ministry of Human Resource Development.
I hope to see substantial progress in the implementation of the measures by the time we hold the next conference in February 2014.
Our universities and other institutes of higher learning should aid in this process.
I am confident that this Conference would throw up new ideas and thoughts.
It is indeed a privilege for me to be present here to deliver the 90th Convocation of the University of Delhi.
Delhi University is today a premier educational body of our country.
Beginning with a small number of 250 students in 1922, Delhi University has grown in status and eminence.
It is now recognised both at home and abroad as a premier imparter of higher education catering to about 5 lakh students.
By pursuing quality education, Delhi University has become a treasure house of knowledge.
It is a reflection of its increasing eminence that it has had the privilege of honouring many eminent personalities of the likes of Madame Curie, Lord Mountbatten and Dr. Zakir Husain, a few among the many.
On this 90th Convocation, I congratulate the University of Delhi for marking one more year of success in delivering meaningful, quality education.
I have been informed that 400 doctoral, 6,500 post graduate and 65,000 graduate degrees will be awarded today to students in a variety of disciplines ranging from medicine to fine arts.
I congratulate all the students on their achievements, and the University for providing them the opportunity to pursue their academic goals.
I hardly need to emphasise that education plays a fundamental role in the development of a nation.
True empowerment comes only with knowledge.
If our country has to continue on its path of higher growth, then the relentless pursuit of higher educational standards is an indispensable requirement for its achievement.
If we look at the statistics, the nation has been able to make remarkable progress in this direction.
During the Eleventh Five Year Plan period, 65 new Central Institutions, including 21 Central Universities, were started and the number of Central Institutions increased by about 75 per cent.
Except for one State, today there is now at least one Central University in every state of our country.
But the question that we should now ask ourselves is whether we are satisfied with the progress that we are making in the educational sector.
An honest answer would reveal that we have miles and miles to go before we can say that we have arrived.
The education sector is today confronted by problems relating to both quantity and quality.
It may be heartening that the density of educational institutions in India has increased from 10 to 14 institutions per 1,000 square kilometres during the Eleventh Plan period.
But it is disheartening that many places in our country do not have a higher educational institution that are within the practical reach of aspiring students.
Realising that it is time for us to make innovative changes in the educational sector, we had organised a conference of the Vice Chancellors of the Central Universities in Rashtrapati Bhavan in February of this year.
The Prime Minster, the Human Resource Development Minister and the Vice Chancellors were agreed on the urgent need to address the challenges that we are facing in the sector.
I am happy to note that the Ministry of Human Resource Development has started the implementation of the decisions taken in right earnest.
We hope to show substantial progress by the time we hold the next conference in February 2014.
India has the second largest higher education system in the world, but the gross enrolment in the country in 2010 was only about 19 per cent, which is much below the world average of 29 per cent.
Adding to the woes is the low enrolment rate of the disadvantaged sections which is much below the national average.
To make education accessible to more students, our efforts must be directed at bringing higher education closer to our population to particularly those in remote corners of the country.
We must remove the imbalances in the reach of higher education across states, regions and sections of society.
Open and Distance Learning can aid in enhancing the reach of higher education.
The enrolment in such programmes in our country increased from 27 lakh to 42 lakh during the Eleventh Plan period.
The time is now ripe to deploy innovative technologies for greater coverage and for improvising modules that can enable better learning.
Inclusivity in higher education should be based on affordability as well.
Various student aid programmes such as scholarships, education loans and self-help schemes should be appropriately structured into the academic system.
But affiliation alone would not suffice.
The affiliating universities must be particularly careful in guiding these colleges to ensure high standards in the curricula and evaluation systems.
Particularly, the Central Universities which are seen as the centres of excellence, should promote high standards and act as centres of inspiration to other institutes of learning.
If we are to redefine the way education is imparted by our educational institutions, the time is now.
According to an international ranking of universities, no Indian university finds a place amongst the global top 200 universities.
This you would agree, is simply unacceptable.
We must develop our universities into global leaders, and for that, the best practices in other countries should be carefully studied and adopted with necessary changes to suit our conditions.
Shortage of faculty and low standards of instruction are at the core of our concerns.
In Central Universities, close to 51 per cent of posts of professor are lying vacant.
While we take urgent steps to fill the vacancies, new ways of employing technology-based learning and collaborative information and communication sharing should be evolved.
Lectures by eminent professors could be transmitted to educational institutions situated away from the main towns and cities using the facilities offered by the National Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology (NMEICT).
Refresher courses for teachers conducted by the Academic Staff Colleges can also be similarly transmitted.
If such teachers interact with each other as well as with the students, the quality of teaching could be enhanced.
Their lectures could also be relayed to remote educational institutions through NMEICT Networks.
Innovation holds the key to future progress.
The number of patent applications filed in India in 2011 was around 42,000.
This is far below the 5 lakh plus applications that China and the US each filed in 2011.
The thrust on research and innovation in our higher educational institutions is lacking.
Out of the 260 lakh students who were enrolled at the under-graduate level and above in 2011-12, only one lakh or 0.4 per cent had registered for PhD.
Therefore, innovation has to be aggressively promoted by our institutes of higher learning, apart from research and development centres.
We must set up industry incubation parks, increase the number of research fellowships, promote inter-disciplinary research through inter-university and intra-university collaboration, and adequately empower our centres of excellence.
Our academic and research positions in important institutions of higher learning suffer from talent deficiency.
Our systems are not conducive to retaining talents, and hence, lose many of them to organizations within and outside the country.
By an adequate system of incentivization, we should be able to discourage this outflow of intellectual capital and at the same time encourage scholars of Indian origin working abroad to return to the country for determined periods of time.
Such a policy could yield higher results in the form of transmission of ideas and new methods of teaching and research.
These innovators need mentoring and our universities, as the fountain head of knowledge, should take the lead.
I hope the students undertaking hands-on projects find the journey from the grassroots to the classroom worthwhile and are able to focus their education to the needs of the country more effectively.
It would also be necessary to promote a culture of excellence in our universities.
A beginning in this direction could be made by identifying at least one centre in each of the universities.
The Ministry of Human Resource Development, the University Grants Commission and each university could join hands for creating such centres within one or two years.
Topics such as water, environment, health, education and urbanization require in-depth data collection, analysis and research.
Experience from around the world has shown that the alumni interest and involvement in the development of their alma mater has shown great results.
We, in India, watched with admiration and respect as the young crowds in Cairo chanted Selmiyya Selmiyya (peacefully, peacefully) and echoed the words of the Father of our Nation, Mahatma Gandhi.
Gandhi himself, during India's long freedom struggle, had drawn upon the Egyptian experience in fighting colonialism, and held in high esteem leaders such as Saad Zaghloul.
As your Excellency is well aware, our historical ties go back much further.
Even prior to the Common Era, Emperor Ashoka's edicts record contact with Egypt under Ptolemy II.
Traders, artisans and philosophers have crossed the seas time and again to enrich each other's composite cultures.
It is really no surprise, that commercial and cultural interactions continue to be at the forefront of our relations.
Excellency, the future will be determined by the youth of our nations.
India and Egypt may be ancient cultures, but our people are young, and their aspirations, hopes and grievances will determine our progress.
As we strive to provide greater economic opportunities, and channelize the energies of our youth towards nation building, we recognize that it cannot be business as usual.
We must find new ways of engagement within our societies and between our countries.
Democracy is incomplete without equity.
At the international level, Egypt and India have worked together closely, recognizing that in our inter-connected world, threats and opportunities, whether it be climate change, terrorism or trade are truly transnational issues.
In the year 1926, the Indian poet and humanist Rabindranath Tagore arrived in Cairo to deliver a lecture.
Excellency, we are confident that these same values inspire your thought and your action in Egypt, as well as in the larger politics of West Asia, where your sage counsel is so critically needed.
We stand with you in our unequivocal support for the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people, and look forward to working closely with you in realizing that goal.
I am confident that your visit will be the beginning of a new era of enhanced cooperation and closer ties between our two great nations.
Please also accept, Excellency, our best wishes for your personal well-being and the progress and prosperity of the friendly people of the Arab Republic of Egypt.
Today, our tourism industry has commendably expanded its operations and range of offerings.
India has welcomed about 6.65 million foreign tourists last year.
This denotes a growth of 5.4% in such arrivals over the previous year.
The increase in disposable incomes of Indian citizens have given them an increasing capacity for leisure travel.
There is also an abundance of attractive offers, new and improved air and rail connections and a general expansion of the tourism infrastructure in all States of India.
Its multiplier effect has been strong and has led to creation of jobs in the primary, secondary and tertiary sectors.
For this, a great amount of the credit is due to the initiatives of the Union Government and the State Governments to invigorate our tourism infrastructure and improve the facilities offered to the foreign and domestic tourist.
The diverse and unique aspects of all that is offered by the different States of India have been projected in a single, successful campaign.
New categories of awards will promote India as a year-round destination.
They will encourage States and Union Territories to develop effective mechanisms for maintaining cleanliness and safeguarding heritage spots.
I take this opportunity to stress the importance of a highly specialized and motivated work force.
One of the most attractive assets that India can offer is our cuisine.
There is no parallel to the range of local specialties that a traveller can savour as he travels through India.
Due attention to safety and quality standards would instill more confidence in the foreign as well as domestic tourists.
I am informed that Government will soon open an institute of excellence for culinary specialization and research.
I wish them all success in this endeavour.
I would also stress the need to ensure that every aspect of our infrastructure responds to the expectations of the best traveled tourists.
A visit to a world renowned heritage site can be marred by poor approach roads or the absence of public facilities en route or by unpleasant sights and odours.
To this end, I call upon host communities to be more conscious and proactive with regard to tourist destinations in their respective areas.
Hotels, museums and monuments should consciously reduce their use of energy and water.
They should consciously try to reduce generation of waste.
Visitors themselves should be reminded to be more mindful.
They should be encouraged and assisted in safeguarding the facilities that they use for future travellers.
Co-operation, rather than competition, between organizations in the tourism industry could help to develop socially responsible products.
I have no doubt, whatsoever, that we are generally on the right path, but we need to update and upgrade constantly.
With these words, I commend those who have succeeded in identifying opportunities and swiftly realizing their tourism potential.
I congratulate the Ministry of Tourism for instituting the National Tourism Awards, and those who have received these awards.
It is indeed a pleasant and privileged occasion for me to join you on the occasion of the first Convocation of the Indian Institute of Management (IIM), Kashipur, which was founded three years back.
As the first batch of 37 Post Graduate Programme students complete their management degree course today, the Institute should pride itself on crossing a major milestone since its inception.
I congratulate the management and faculty whose undivided attention and profound dedication towards nursing this Institute in its nascent stage has been crucial for the management programmes to commence and gain momentum.
I am very happy that IIM Lucknow played the role of a mentoring institution and I compliment the team from IIM Lucknow which was involved in the setting up of IIM Kashipur.
As the youngest of IIMs, IIM Kashipur should strive to build a unique image for itself, while maintaining the high quality that IIMs are known for.
I am happy to know that IIM Kashipur is considering the setting up two Centres of Excellence, on Sustainable Development and on Competitiveness.
I am sure these Centres will stimulate new thinking, research and practice in their focus area.
Many have felt the need for a renewed focus by our management institutions towards courses on entrepreneurship.
At a time when IIM Kashipur is consolidating its course structure, it should leverage this opportunity and design management programmes in a manner that will become a model for others to follow.
Students should be encouraged as part of their academic curriculum to contribute to positive social development by helping people of the region learn better ways of running their farms, small businesses and other community ventures.
This will instill in the students a sense of obligation to society, which they carry with them throughout their professional lives.
I am confident of your Institute becoming a premier source for highly trained managers, a catalyst of entrepreneurship, and a resource hub for socio-economic development.
We need a strategy to make the Indian Industry compete successfully with the best in the world.
Skilled manpower has to play a key role in this strategy.
A healthy growth of Indian business will be greatly facilitated by the availability of a competent cadre of management professionals.
The pool of such professionals in our country is unfortunately not enough to meet the needs of our industry.
The annual enrolment in commerce and management streams has increased from around 23 lakh in 2006-07 to around 34 lakh in 2011-12.
The need for graduates and post-graduates from these streams will be much higher in the future and we must be ready to meet the demand.
According to an international ranking of universities, no Indian university figures among the top 200 universities of the world.
Our efforts must be aimed at taking Indian universities into the top-league.
Innovation is also an important driver for growth.
Unfortunately, we also lag behind our major competitors in this aspect.
The number of patent applications filed in India in 2011 was about 42,000, which is far below the 5 lakh plus applications in both China and the US.
A culture of innovation must be encouraged in our country and for that, we must create more opportunities for collaborative research, set up industry incubation parks in educational institutions and provide more research fellowships.
I am confident IIM Kashipur will be in the forefront of management education in the country.
I have every confidence in your commitment and devotion and your ability to deliver quality management education.
In 2020, the average Indian will be only 29 years old as compared to an average age of 37 for China and the US, 45 for West Europe and 48 for Japan.
It is clear that the youth of India, who are the leaders of tomorrow, shall aspire for higher standards of living, better service delivery and increased transparency and accountability.
The challenges being large and diverse, India needs grass-root leaders who place people and their problems at the centre of the social, economic and political discourse.
It is only when we work together and each Indian feels empowered to contribute to the task of nation building that we shall be able to combat poverty, malnutrition, hunger and disease.
I call upon the faculty and students of IIM Kashipur to focus on the problems of the bottom of the pyramid and develop innovative solutions to address their concerns.
I had said that we are equal children before our mother; and India asks each one of us, in whatever role we play in the complex drama of nation building, to do our duty with integrity, commitment and unflinching loyalty to the values enshrined in our Constitution.
If each of us follows this principle, I am confident that India will become a more vibrant, dynamic and prosperous nation.
Dear students, the role played by alumni in the growth of leading universities across the world is well acknowledged.
Alumni are active participants in the affairs of top universities in the US including Harvard.
I hope that the students, who are passing out of this Institute today, and the others to follow in the future, will associate with their alma mater and contribute to its development in a meaningful and significant way.
As you step into the professional world, you must remember that the potential for learning is never exhausted.
Education is a life-long process.
I hope that your studies here would have inspired you to seek knowledge at every stage in your career.
During the five decades of its existence, this College has been instrumental in providing quality medical education in Kerala.
It is a matter of pride that the alumni of this College have excelled in various fields of medical education, patient care and research, both nationally and internationally.
I am happy to note that a series of academic, health awareness and patient care programmes have been planned for this Golden Jubilee year, to reach out to the needy and to provide them with free medical care.
This Medical College is also the main agency through which various health and family welfare schemes of the Government are implemented in this district.
I am told that an initiative has been launched to make Alappuzha the first self-sufficient district in Kerala in the field of health care.
The high standard of public health in Kerala is known to all.
The State has always been proactive in implementing national programmes for control and eradication of diseases.
The family welfare programme, universal immunization programme and maternal and child health activities have helped the State reach global benchmarks in the health status of its citizens.
The infant mortality rate is 12 per 1000 live births, while the maternal mortality rate is 81 per 1 lakh live births, which are much below the national average.
Kerala is a big contributor to the pool of health care professionals, particularly doctors and nurses, in the country.
It is a leader amongst Indian states in terms of human development, with the highest literacy rate of around 94 per cent and highest sex ratio of 1,084 females per 1,000 males in the country.
The Kerala model of social development, where the Government initiatives are matched by active civic participation, is indeed laudable.
Unless the health of the population is secured, the productive potential of the country cannot be realized to the full extent.
A sound health care system depends on the three pillars of availability, quality and affordability.
The National Rural Health Mission was launched in 2005 to address these parameters in our health sector.
The public sector health service in our country is limited by its reach.
Many in our population are dependent on the private sector for delivery of health services.
It is burdensome for poor people to access expensive medical treatment, and many fall into the trap of poverty on account of that.
The quality of health care delivery by some of the health service providers also leave much to be desired.
We must correct this situation by expanding good quality affordable public sector health care facilities.
Our public expenditure on health care was 1.04 per cent of GDP during the Eleventh Five Year Plan period.
This should rise to 2.5 per cent of GDP by the end of the Twelfth Plan period if we are to augment public health care in the country in a big way.
Augmenting public resources will by itself not automatically translate into expansion of health care infrastructure unless there is adequate number of competent health care professionals to serve this sector.
It is envisaged that this density of medical professionals will increase to 354 by the end of the Twelfth Five Year Plan period.
There is urgent need for more institutes of learning for imparting medical education.
It is gratifying to note that six AIIMS like institutions are to be set up soon.
It is also necessary to increase the capacity of our existing medical schools and nursing colleges and enhance the standard of education in them.
I am confident that our public sector medical colleges will meet the twin challenge of greater quantity and better quality.
No one should be denied specialty medical treatment due to high costs.
We must strengthen the mechanism of health insurance.
The Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana that gives beneficiaries cash less in-patient treatment should provide access to comprehensive primary, secondary and tertiary medical care.
The benefits of this scheme should touch every one below the poverty line.
India is a global leader in information and communication technology.
Taking advantage of this, we must build an efficient health information system for universal registration of births and deaths, nutritional surveillance and disease surveillance.
A sound data base should come handy for our policy makers to make timely interventions.
Satellite-based technology has made it possible for health care to reach the remotest parts of our country.
The tele-medicine project has enabled remotely-located health care centres to interact with super specialty hospitals in urban centres for provision of health care consultation to the needy and under-served population.
We have envisaged infant mortality rate to reduce from 44 per 1000 live births to 25 by the end of the Twelfth Plan period, and the maternal mortality rate to reduce from 212 per one lakh live births to 100 during this period.
These targets are within our reach but for that comprehensive efforts are essential.
A sustainable model of health care with the participation of all stakeholders is the need of the hour.
It gives me great pleasure to be in Kottayam to inaugurate the 125th Anniversary celebrations of Malayala Manorama, one of the great newspapers of India.
I would like to extend my hearty congratulations to Shri Mammen Mathew and all members of the Malayala Manorama Group on attaining this major milestone in its journey.
In the last 125 years, the Manorama has reported on colonialism giving way to independence, self-sufficiency replacing hunger and deprivation, political emancipation evolving into a strong, mature democracy and the emergence of India as a major political and economic force in the world.
Started in 1888, in this small town of Kottayam, Malayala Manorama is now an international media brand with a notable presence in the cyber world and electronic media.
Manorama now reaches the drawing room of Malayalam readers across the world and Manorama publications come out in various languages including I believe the YEAR BOOK which has a Bengali version.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Kerala has been a pioneer and a path-breaker in many fields.
Near universal literacy and enrolment in schools has been achieved.
Fertility rate of its people has declined below replacement level.
The overall sex ratio is in favour of women and women enjoy higher life expectancy than men.
Infant and maternal morality is low.
Manorama has always stood for the people and with the people in the battle against injustice and for freedom and equality.
I believe this is the largest collection for relief work initiated by a newspaper in India.
This shows that Manorama's care for the society is not limited to Kerala alone but extends to whole of India.
The Malayalam language owes a great deal to the crusading zeal of Malayala Manorama.
Along with other newspapers, the Manorama led the way in developing a common script for printing and dissemination of the language.
The Newspaper and its distinguished sister publication, Bhashaposhini have been a nursery for great thinkers and poets of Kerala.
The Manorama played a stellar role in our freedom movement, for which it suffered at the hands of then rulers.
The newspaper was shut down for nine years but its management and staff refused to bow down or compromise on their ideals.
In our country, freedom of expression is guaranteed by the Constitution and the influence, credibility and quality of our media is well recognized.
The media has an important role to play in cleansing public life.
However, to undertake this role the conduct of the media itself should be above board.
It must be always kept in mind that ends and means are both important.
The highest standards of ethics must be maintained at all times.
Sensationalism should never become a substitute for objective assessment and truthful reporting.
Gossip and speculation should not replace hard facts.
Every effort should be made to ensure that political or commercial interests are not passed off as legitimate and independent opinion.
Integrity and independence are two sides of the same coin and both must be equally important for our media and for every one of us.
You should always work with this in mind.
God has placed in our hands a mighty weapon.
To use it for our personal, vindictive and vitriolic ends will be an unpardonable and immoral act injurious to the faith bestowed on us by a large number of people.
God does not want that.
If these words were true then, it is true now and will remain true in future.
I am confident that the present leadership and the whole family of Malayala Manorama will continue to discharge this sacred Trust in letter and spirit.
While both the Manorama and the people of Kerala have much to be proud about, there is little room for complacency.
Society in Kerala continues to face a number of challenges.
There is need for industrialization and rapid creation of jobs.
The remittance revenue from non-resident Keralites has to be channelized into long term development activities.
Adequate provision needs to be made for the care of the elderly, whose numbers are rapidly growing.
Issues of urbanization such as waste management and disposal need to be addressed with a sense of urgency.
Atrocities against women needs to be tackled with a stern hand.
There is need to find innovative solutions and new methods of mobilizing society for collective welfare as Kerala prepares to address these new challenges.
I am confident the Manorama Group will play its due role in this regard.
I once again congratulate Malayala Manorama for its 125 years of public service, and wish the organization every success in the future.
May you continue to serve the people of India with strength, vigour and dedication.
May your columns give voice to the voiceless and unorganized sectors.
May you stand tall as a pillar that supports our democratic political system and be a guiding light for the society and leadership.
Thank you.
Jai Hind.
I am happy to be present here today at this premiere Maintenance Depot of the Indian Air Force to award Colours to Air Force Central Medical Establishment and 3 Base Repair Depot.
Both these establishments have distinguished themselves in the service of the nation.
They have a rich history of professional excellence and have served the nation with honour and distinction.
For their devotion, professionalism and exceptional service, the nation honours them today, by awarding them Colours.
This is an expression of gratitude and appreciation for the exceptional services they have rendered the nation.
I compliment the fraternity of Air Force Central Medical Establishment and 3 Base Repair Depot for this recognition.
As the proud guardian of our sovereign skies, the Indian Air Force has been discharging its duty with fortitude.
The brave air warriors have been engaged in undertaking a whole range of crucial missions for the nation.
They range from disaster relief operations to supporting counter-insurgency operations.
As a nation, we are fully committed to maintaining peace and we are steadfast in our belief that the resolution of disputes should be through discussion.
But at the same time, we would need to be prepared to face any aggression and safeguard our territorial integrity with all our might, and the Indian Air Force has a critical role to play in this effort.
They have in the past risen admirably in defence of our nation with valour, courage, devotion and fearlessness.
The men and women, who stand before me today, are the proud sons and daughters of mother India.
They have vowed to lay down their lives for the defence of our motherland and thus symbolize patriotism of the most noble kind.
They uphold the highest standards of the defence forces and I congratulate them for their devotion and discipline.
I also take this opportunity to congratulate the air warriors on parade today, for the exemplary impeccable drill, turnout and discipline.
The unit was first established by the Royal Air Force as the Central Medical Board at Lahore in 1940.
The creation of the establishment was a recognition of a necessity for standardized procedures for selection and subsequent medical assessment of aircrew.
The primary role of the organization is to provide comprehensive medical assessment of aircrew of the armed forces, paramilitary services and the civil aviation industry.
The unit personnel, both past and present, have relentlessly pursued excellence and have set standards that are worthy of emulation.
I am happy to note that in 2005, the unit achieved the rare distinction of becoming the first unit in the Armed Forces medical services to acquire an ISO 9001:2000 certification.
The unit has achieved excellence in providing quality aero-medical care and continues to set higher benchmarks through perseverance and hard work.
I am confident that the unit will continue to serve the nation selflessly in the years to come.
I am happy to know that ever since its inception in 1962, the Depot has discharged its duty zealously and functioned as a major repair and maintenance support unit of the Indian Air Force.
The role that they play in the defence preparedness of nation cannot be exaggerated.
Nations may have the most sophisticated platforms, but their effective deployment will hinge on the quality of repairs and maintenance of aircraft and their various equipment.
With increasing sophistication of aircraft and their avionics, the role of repair and support organizations has become more critical than ever.
The aircraft that we can deploy and their lethality will depend on the efficiency of such organizations.
Besides playing the crucial role of repair and support, the 3BRD has several other achievements to its credit.
The BRD has undertaken successfully the difficult task of life revision of aero engines without involving the original manufacturer relying on indigenous technology.
Many contemporary technologies have been utilized on helicopters and aero engines for the first time in the country at 3 BRD, and this has substantially contributed towards minimizing our dependency on foreign sources.
The Depot continues to strive to attain complete self-reliance in helicopter maintenance and provide quality maintenance support to the field units.
I have been informed that the Depot is presently handling the induction of newly acquired state-of-the-art Mi-17 V5 helicopters and has also been designated as its major overhaul agency, a task which I am confident it will execute with remarkable professionalism and commitment.
In acknowledgement and recognition of the outstanding performance, I am pleased to award Colours to Air Force Central Medical Establishment and 3 Base Repair Depot.
On this occasion, I take the opportunity to acknowledge and compliment the contribution and sacrifice of all the personnel and their families, past and present, of the two establishments, for their dedication, devotion and service to the nation.
The nation is indeed proud of you.
I wish you and your families the very best and a glorious future.
We are indeed proud of you and your achievements.
I am happy to be here at the 33rd Annual Convocation of the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research at Chandigarh.
The last time that I had the opportunity to attend the Annual Convocation of PGI was in 2008, when I was the Union Minister of External Affairs.
I am delighted to be back once again after 5 years, on the Golden Jubilee Anniversary of the foundation of PGI.
The PGIMER came into existence in 1962 thanks to the wisdom and foresight of Sardar Partap Singh Kairon, the then Chief Minister of Punjab and the hospital was inaugurated by Pandit Nehru.
This Institute was established as a center of excellence to develop postgraduate medical education in as many branches as possible and produce specialists in several disciplines of medicine.
The basic idea was that these specialists would spread out across the country to various medical colleges and institutions and in turn, set up a nucleus of excellence in each of these institutions.
It is a matter of pride that PGI alumni can be found today in all parts of the country and the institution is known for its comprehensive facilities for teaching, research and patient care.
I compliment all those who have been associated with the establishment and growth of this great institution.
The mission of PGIMER and similar institutes of excellence would remain incomplete unless the interests of the common man is taken care of.
It is only when the life of the villager living in the remote districts of India is touched by your research and the most underprivileged child in your ward goes back home satisfied with your care, that you will know that your mission has been truly accomplished.
Good health of its people is the very foundation of a nation.
A person who is not healthy is unable to access opportunities for learning, growth and productive work.
In India, a number of rights are guaranteed to its citizens but none of these can be utilized or enforced by persons who are sick, enfeebled and spend their entire energy on treatment and medical care.
At the national level, according to a WHO study, the estimated economic loss for India due to deaths caused by all the diseases in 2005 was 1.3% of its GDP.
With an increase in the number of non-communicable diseases, this loss is apprehended to increase to 5% of GDP by 2015 if it is not checked.
Our medical healthcare system has to be developed to cater to medical requirements of all sections of society, both in rural and urban areas.
A good healthcare system would need to be country-specific, and therefore, India would need to look at achieving universal health coverage based on its own perspective and requirements, while bearing in mind the lessons that can be drawn from the experiences of others.
Medicines account for 72% of private expenditure of health.
India has taken a major decision on distribution of free generic drugs to patients seeking healthcare in public facilities.
This will bring down out-of-pocket expenditure and provide affordable access to medicine, particularly for the poor and disadvantaged.
Implementing this requires funds as also efficient management systems.
In today's era technology based initiatives including telemedicine can be employed to broaden the reach of healthcare.
The Government is looking at scaling up expenditure of health from the current level to 2.5% of GDP by 2017 i.e the end of 12th Plan and 3% by 2022 i.e end of 13th Plan.
The Government, singularly, cannot be a provider of healthcare.
While the aim is to strengthen the public healthcare sector, we should look at ways to encourage cooperation between the public and private sectors in achieving the health goals.
All stakeholders have to be a part of the effort to provide universal healthcare.
From the pharmacists to the doctors, from industry to drug manufacturers, from medical insurance to management of hospitals and running of primary health centres, all have a role in the success of the health system.
The potential of India as centre for medical research and innovation given its academic, scientific, technical and industrial capabilities should be fully explored.
It will be incorrect if we were to look at health coverage only in terms of curative and interventionist approach.
Preventive healthcare is equally important particularly in India where the number of those suffering from diabetes and cardio-vascular diseases is on the rise.
Our health system, therefore, will need to treat people and, at the same time, advise and guide them about how to deal with and prevent some of these medical conditions.
Hygiene and sanitation are basic for preventing diseases.
In these efforts, participation at the local level particularly at the village level through Panchayati Raj Institutions can ensure effective implementation.
The transformation of India's health system to be able to provide universal health coverage is a process that will span a period of time.
A major re-engineering process began with National Rural Health Mission, launched in 2005.
It sought to extend healthcare services to every village in the country and to strengthen healthcare infrastructure through sub-centres, primary health centres and community health centres.
The aim now is to extend the coverage to urban areas also.
There should be necessary standards of care observed at every level of healthcare.
A network of healthcare centres has to be established.
This can be sustained only with adequate number of doctors and other paramedical supporting staff.
Merely constructing hospitals is not enough.
It needs the human resources to make them functional and effective.
Medical colleges, nursing institutions, and training schools for paramedical professions would need to be augmented substantially.
Shortage of trained medical personnel can be a major constraint for providing universal healthcare.
Progress in the health sector is key to India's future prominence in the world.
A nation's productivity depends on the health and well-being of its citizens.
Economic growth that does not go hand in hand with reduction in avoidable mortality and ill health is neither sustainable nor desirable.
Provision of universal health care is therefore a matter of faith for the Government.
For this, the public health system must be greatly expanded and strengthened across the Nation.
We need many more nurses, doctors, paramedics and health workers.
We need to decentralize planning and implementation of healthcare to the district and sub-district levels.
We need to take health services closer to the homes of the families-even a primary health centre is too far by today's standard and need.
We need out of the box managerial and administrative reforms in the health departments at the state and central level.
We need public health professionals to spearhead public health programs.
We need to develop effective models of healthcare for the ever-increasing urban population.
India's national health system must be a strong, sensitive and efficient public health system.
I call upon all stakeholders to join hands to build a solid consensus for a historic transformation of India's health sector in the coming years.
The PGI is a living tribute to the faculty, staff and students who have, over the years, worked selflessly to bring the Institute to its present position of pre-eminence.
The PGI must rise to be one of the top medical universities in the world within a specific period of time.
This target is ambitious but I am confident the faculty, the students and the staff can together achieve this.
We must develop world class centres of excellence focused not only on traditional specialties but also on cross-cutting themes such as infectious diseases, vaccine development and regenerative sciences.
I call upon the faculty and scholars of PGI to step forward and become leaders in the world of medicine.
The government will support you in this endeavour in every possible way.
I wish all the graduating students and awardees the very best in their future endeavours.
Sir Ramesh Jeewoolall, Chancellor of the University of Mauritius,
Distinguished guests and dear students,
I am delighted to be here among you.
I have been in your country for nearly two days now.
I have been mesmerised by the natural beauty of this island which is rivalled only by the warmth and friendliness of its people.
I have been touched by the gracious hospitality accorded to me.
I am, above all, struck by the profound awareness that this island's success is vested, in large part, in the education of its citizens.
Mahatma Gandhi's brief stopover in 1901 had set the stage for a peaceful revolution in the area of education in Mauritius.
Nurtured by the efforts of Barrister Manilall Doctor and other stalwarts, the seeds of social transformation continued to grow after Independence, thanks to the visionary leadership of Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, who was deeply aware of the power of education.
Investment in education continues to reap rich dividends for Mauritius and has been one of the reasons for the praiseworthy level of development that we see in Mauritius today.
Excellency, Sir Ramesh Jeewoolall, Chancellor of the University of Mauritius, it is indeed a privilege to receive the Honorary Degree of Doctor of Civil Law from your esteemed University.
I thank you for this high honour.
This University has a rich tradition of providing quality education that responds responding to the contemporary needs of Mauritian society.
I wish all its distinguished faculty members, scholars and students every success in their academic pursuits.
On this occasion, I extend to all Mauritians the good wishes of the Government and the people of India.
Not only has Mauritius triumphed in the realisation of its democratic and secular ideals, but it has also registered a commendable rate of economic growth, and established for its citizens the strong institutions that make Mauritius a well integrated and progressive people.
Today Mauritius figures high in economic and social development indicators in Africa and has become a role model to many countries because of its economic success story.
In recent years, we have been able to leverage these linkages to evolve a modern, dynamic and mutually beneficial partnership, guided by close and frequent high-level political interaction - and strengthened by robust people-to-people contacts.
The abiding strength of our bilateral partnership is amply reflected in close and strong engagement at various levels.
I am happy to note that several agreements have been signed during my visit in key sectors of our respective economies including tourism, health and medicine, co-operation in the addressing the issues related to senior citizens and disabilities.
These agreements reflect the diversity of our engagement and will definitely benefit the people of both countries.
With over 600 million Indians below the age of 25, we have prioritised the education and training of our youth over the next two decades to carry forward our development agenda.
Needless to say, India is committing huge resources to towards this end.
Distinguished Ladies and gentlemen, cooperation in the field of education has always been an important dimension of our bilateral relations.
Nearly 100 scholarships are offered annually to Mauritian students to pursue under-graduate, post-graduate and research studies in various streams in India.
This is in addition to 290 slots for short term courses under the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) programme.
In recent years, we have seen an upswing in the number of Mauritian students availing of these scholarships.
Many Mauritian students also enrol themselves in Indian universities on a self-financing basis.
We welcome them in India.
As the next generation, young people should have a say in determining our responses to the variety of challenges that our developing nations face today.
I once again thank the University of Mauritius once for receiving me and I wish you all great success in the future.
Distinguished Guests, Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a singular honour and privilege to address this distinguished gathering on the eve of the 45th Anniversary of the Independence of Mauritius.
I extend to the Government and the people of Mauritius, warm greetings and good wishes on behalf of the Government and the people of the Republic of India.
I would also like to convey my sincere gratitude for the exceptionally warm welcome and hospitality accorded to me and to my delegation today.
I thank you for your kind words and agree with your remarks that India and Mauritius share a unique relationship.
I am also very happy to see that we stand in a hall named after Swami Vivekananda, whose message of tolerance, compassion and understanding remains universally relevant today.
My thoughts go to the period when India won her freedom in 1947 after a prolonged valiant struggle and courageous sacrifice.
Mauritius had her own architects of freedom, outstanding men and women; steeled by moral conviction and unfazed by the odds that they were up against.
Among them, none stood taller than Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, the Father of the Mauritian nation.
The contribution of visionary Mauritian leaders have transformed this nation's destiny in a relatively short period of time.
On a historic occasion as this, it is incumbent upon us to pay tribute to the legacy of those whose sacrifices paved the road to the freedom that is enjoyed here today.
Ladies and Gentlemen For India, Mauritius symbolises the very triumph of its own civilisational ethos and character.
The people of India appreciate the tribute paid by the people of Mauritius to the Father of the Indian Nation, Mahatma Gandhi in selecting March 12 - the day Mahatma Gandhi began his iconic Dandi March - as the Independence Day of Mauritius.
Both our peoples are drawn largely from the same historical, cultural and spiritual provenance.
It is thus no wonder that the relationship between India and Mauritius has an unwavering vitality.
Forged in the resilience of the thousands of brave men and women who were brought here to toil on sugarcane fields, and drawing inspiration from Mahatma Gandhi's epochal and transformative stopover in 1901, our partnership has grown in spirit and substance with each passing year.
Tomorrow we will discuss how to further enhance this vibrant and mutually beneficial cooperation.
Myriad people-to-people contacts are the lifeblood of our friendship.
Ladies and Gentlemen, For several millennia, the Indian Ocean has been a key arbiter of the subcontinent's fortunes.
You are the proverbial Star and Key of the Indian Ocean.
Naturally we have a convergence of interests as the Indian ocean straddles Asia and Africa.
Let me assure you that India will remain a steadfast partner of Mauritius.
Mr. Prime Minister, we are grateful to Mauritius for standing by us on issues of great importance to India.
Mauritius has been steadfast in its support of India's principled, moral and consistent stand on the issue of terrorism.
We are grateful for your support for India's rightful claim to Permanent Membership of the United Nations Security Council.
India and Mauritius must to explore new avenues and opportunities to enhance and enrich our engagement even further for our mutual benefit.
To the communities of Indian origin I extend my felicitations and say to them that India is blessed with a diaspora that mirrors India's own rich diversity.
I speak for all Indians when I say that we cherish our close ties with Mauritius.
We see in you a trusted partner in realising our shared vision of stability, peace and prosperity in this region and the world.
We look forward to working together with you to achieve the full potential of our partnership.
I truly believe that there can be no limit to our success in every sphere.
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I take this opportunity to extend warm greetings to women in all parts of our country.
I thank them for their invaluable contribution in the making of our great nation.
I am happy that on this occasion we are recognising the exemplary service of the outstanding women who have been conferred the Stree Shakti Awards today.
We are paying tribute not only to them but to all women who have worked and contributed directly or indirectly to social development in our country.
Nirbhaya as she is now known was a brave and courageous girl who fought till the very last minute for her dignity and her life.
She is a true hero and symbolises the best in Indian youth and women.
Her sad demise should not be in vain.
We must do everything possible to ensure that such an incident never happens again.
We must strive to ensure that women feel safe and secure at all times in our country.
We must inculcate in every member of our society the highest of respect for women.
We as a society must work towards changing negative perceptions about women.
Women should be provided a safe, secure and congenial environment in which their talents can flower and they can contribute their full share in the building of our nation.
Our history, traditions, religions and cultural values as well as the Constitution demand nothing less.
Women comprise 48.5 per cent of our total population and although the overall sex ratio has increased by 7 points during the decade 2001 to 2011, the declining child sex ratio for children of 0-6 years of age, is disturbing.
The figure for female literacy is also 16.7 percent below male literacy.
Surveys have indicated that female hourly wage rates in agriculture also vary from 50 to 75 per cent of the male wage rates.
More disturbing is the increase in the incidence of violence against women.
India ranks 134 in 2011 among 187 countries in terms of the UNDP Human Development Index (HDI) and Gender Inequality Index (GII).
The principle of gender equality is enshrined in our Preamble, Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles.
There is no room for complacency.
To ensure a safe and secure environment for women in their workplaces, the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Bill, 2013 has been passed by Parliament.
However, legislation will become effective only if they are supported by efficient enforcement mechanisms.
Reforms in police and judiciary need to be taken up on a continuing basis and in all earnest, so that women get fair and prompt justice.
These measures need to be further backed by efforts aimed at empowerment of women and improvement of their health, education and employment opportunities.
We should consciously invest in the future of the women of India.
Women achievers have continuously left their footprints on the sands of time in our country.
Rural women have scripted their success stories by participating in Panchayat elections, far exceeding their 33% quota.
It is heartening to see that there has been an upward trend in control and management and in the collective decision-making in these Groups.
India will also have its first Bank dedicated only to women.
Swami Vivekananda was of the view that the best barometer of the progress of a nation is its treatment of its women.
I call upon all citizens of India to persevere, in their respective spheres, for the comprehensive implementation, in letter and in spirit, of the constitutional rights guaranteed to every woman in India.
I compliment all the award winners for the excellent work done by them and the Ministry of Women and Child Development for organizing this event.
Thank you.
JAI HIND.
I am delighted to join you in the Seminar being organized on the occasion of the 150th Birth Anniversary of Swami Vivekananda.
He lived for less than forty years but he led a life of intensity and expansiveness.
He brought out the divinity lying dormant in man.
He felt that religion should be a weapon for self transformation as well as transformation of the society.
His Guru, Shri Ramakrishna Paramhansa, had taught him that service to man was service to God.
Swamiji made this principle the basis of his social service programme.
He imbibed the message of his Guru that anything which helps to realize God in this life should be accepted as conducive to the practice of religion and realization of the Highest Truth.
Swamiji never thought of his Guru in relation to his own personal life but thought of him in relation to India and the rest of the world.
Swamiji was undoubtedly a brilliant scholar and a profound thinker.
He combined his wisdom with his concern for the nation and her suffering masses.
He travelled extensively within the country to understand their problems.
Swamiji did not prescribe any abrupt change in society.
He believed that socio-economic change can be brought about through education.
It has inspired other noble initiatives to come forward and contribute to social development in a meaningful way.
When I visited Chicago one year back, I had the privilege of unveiling a plaque at the place where Swamiji had delivered his famous address in 1893.
Swami Vivekananda was a bridge between the East and the West.
He taught our countrymen to adapt Indian ethos to the notions of Western humanism such as individual freedom, justice and respect for women.
He loved and treated all human beings as equal without any distinction of caste, religion, race, nationality or gender.
He believed in egalitarian philosophy and wanted equal opportunities for all by not bringing down the higher, but raising the lower up to the level of the higher.
He was deeply familiar with the messages of other religions.
Swamiji laid the foundation for harmony amongst religions and also harmony between religion and science.
He portrayed religion as a universal concept and liberated it from the age-old scourges of superstitions, dogma and intolerance.
It is gratifying to note that under the guidance of these committees, several activities have been undertaken to mark this event such as printing of books on the life and teachings of Swamiji in different languages, production and circulation of audio visual material on Swamiji, propagation of his teachings through media, and conservation of monuments of different religions as a mark of respect to his views on religious harmony.
Despite progress made by us, our society is confronted with issues challenging our ethics and morality.
It is indeed a privilege for me to be present on this occasion and to participate in this programme of National Innovation Foundation, which is being celebrated to recognize the achievements of grassroots innovators.
At the outset, I compliment the National Innovation Foundation.
The India story of social transformation is slowly unfolding.
In this decade of innovation, every sector needs prudent solutions to persistent problems.
The achievements of the National Innovation Foundation (NIF) over the last decade, based on the voluntary contribution of thousands of Honey Bee Network members are creditable.
Reaching out to different villages through Shodh Yatras, a new idiom of social connectivity has been achieved at the grassroots level.
I am particularly happy that in the 7th Biennial Awards there are innovators from all parts of the country.
I suggest that NIF organizes workshops for creative children who are awarded every year to help them understand and meet the social challenges in their lives.
Their creativity and inquisitiveness has to be harnessed for larger social good.
School and college textbooks should also have a few lessons based on the life of grassroots innovators and innovative children.
Among the various weak links in the value chain around grassroots innovations, the absence of community fabrication workshops and laboratories is a major gap.
The effort by NIF to provide basic fabrication facilities to grassroots innovators in the form of 27 community workshops in 13 States, including one in Jammu and Kashmir and seven in the North-Eastern States, is laudable.
Conversion of an idea into a prototype is an important stage in any incubation cycle.
There are many examples of innovations being recognized this year, which demonstrate an ability of grassroots innovators to develop robust, frugal and efficient solutions to local problems such as bamboo processing machines, and multipurpose herbal processing machine for fruits and herbs.
They not only trigger entrepreneurial opportunities for the innovators but also generate sustainable livelihood options for the users.
Various developmental programmes should encourage field trials of such innovations to expand livelihood opportunities in the country.
NIF should take up innovative and socially useful technologies under the Grassroots Technological Innovation Acquisition Fund and get them licensed at low cost or no cost to entrepreneurs in different parts of the country.
It must be ensured that the benefits reach the masses as early as possible.
The social media tools can also be leveraged to spread the reach of socially useful technologies at no additional cost.
I realize that unless financial support is available at an early stage of risky innovative ventures, the aspirations of thousands of creative people will remain unfilled.
We have to collectively ensure that no idea remains unattended for want of sufficient support.
Unless NIF begins with the incubation of two to three thousand ideas, it will not get those few hundred potentially viable leads which may eventually generate twenty to thirty breakthroughs in the market place.
We need to work collectively to ensure that all potential ideas are exploited in the larger national interest.
Recently, while interacting with the Vice Chancellors of Central Universities, I advised them to have a chapter of the National Innovation Club in every University.
These clubs should search and spread innovations, sense and identify the problems and celebrate the outstanding achievements in the hinterland.
The academic institutions should pay closer attention to the creative potential of our society and try to add value to the grassroots innovations to enable commercial or social diffusion.
Such partnerships have to play a crucial role in mobilizing the energy of youth and their faculty guides for making India a truly inclusive society.
This link between the formal and informal science will not only help these grassroots technologies to graduate into viable products but also trigger experimental ethic amongst others.
Universities can also establish co-creation labs where young students and innovators work together.
I call upon the private sector to also take steps in supporting this inclusive innovation movement.
The knowledge of women is very crucial in making our society inclusive.
We have to recognize, identify and enhance their ability to solve social problems with the support of the formal system.
The agricultural growth needs to be accelerated to improve the living conditions of vast majority of people dependent on it.
I notice that a large number of innovations recognized by NIF are from this sector.
If the departments of agriculture at the central and state level share these ideas, many more farmers, artisans, fishermen and women will be encouraged to experiment.
Incentives for scientists, extension workers, public administrators to help in spreading and spawning creative ideas of people for mass or niche applications are essential.
Those who help spread the innovations deserve no less recognition than those who develop them.
I am told that NIF is also including such officials in the list of partnership awards to create a healthy, synergistic and mutually supportive innovation eco-system in the country.
India is perhaps the only country where grassroots innovations are a part of National Innovation System.
We have to now institutionalize the culture of innovation at all levels of public administration so that tales of persistent neglect of Indian genius become a matter of past.
In future, no creative voice should remain unheard, no innovative mind should remain unengaged and no story of institutional transformation should remain untold to our young generation.
I am happy that NIF has announced attractive awards to those who can offer innovative and extremely affordable solutions for the purpose.
I feel honoured to present the first Tagore Award for Cultural Harmony for the year 2012 to Late Pandit Ravi Shankar, the great Indian Sitar Maestro whose renditions had and will continue to enthrall the world.
Though Pandit Ravi Shankar is no more with us in his physical form, his music will always remain with us and remind us of the profound contributions he made towards internationalization of Indian classical music.
I am glad that his wife, Shrimati Sukanya Shankar, and his daughter, Ms. Anoushka Shankar, are here today to accept the award.
As part of the commemoration of the 150th Birth Anniversary of Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore, this award was instituted to promote values of universal brotherhood.
In May 2012, in the closing ceremony of the Tagore commemoration, I had the privilege of announcing the name of Pandit Ravi Shankar as the recipient of the first Tagore Award.
This versatile genius, being a poet, an author, a composer, a painter, a philosopher and an educationist, was the perfect ambassador of our country for cultural exchange with the world outside.
The literature, history and culture of different nations reflect the universal values of humanity.
In a world still fettered by race, creed and colour, Rabindranath Tagore promoted internationalism for a new world order based on diversity, open-mindedness, tolerance, and co-existence of many cultures.
This bard of India made the world his home.
He visualized a cosmopolitan place of learning where students from different cultures would meet and learn from one another.
When Rabindranath Tagore was born in 1861, the collective consciousness of our people was afflicted by feelings of inferiority.
By the year 1941 when he breathed his last, these ideas were no longer prevalent.
Tagore was among the pioneers in bringing this sea change in attitude.
He preached the religion of Truth and Harmony, and of Love and Sympathy.
As we celebrate the centenary of the first Asian to be awarded the Nobel Prize, it is befitting that we confer the award instituted in his name to an equally loved son of India, Pandit Ravi Shankar.
As a composer, performer, teacher and writer, he rendered invaluable service to Indian music and culture.
After years of dedicated training under his illustrious Guru, Baba Allaudin Khan, and establishing himself in the world of classical music in India, he embarked on a journey to the West to spread the beauty of Indian classical music.
He is acclaimed for his pioneering work in bringing Indian classical music to the West and popularizing it.
He studied the Sitar for seven years, eighteen hours a day, and became a master of the instrument which was then unknown in most of the world.
He collaborated with renowned international figures in music to bring the Sitar to a position of prominence in the global music arena.
He did the groundwork for other Indian musicians to follow, in performing Indian classical music across the world.
The world is now permeated with the acceptance of Indian music, which is largely due to the vision of Pandit Ravi Shankar.
The Sitar in the hands of Pandit Ravi Shankar was more than a musical instrument.
Drawing on our own traditions, he made music a universal language.
He was foremost in reaching out to the young, making sure Hindustani classical music found a place in their hearts and lives.
It was Pandit Ravi Shankar who as a living legend deeply influenced many key Western artistes and musicians.
His work with the great Yehudi Menuhin transcended faiths, regions and cultures.
He has been recognized widely for his contribution to music and for bringing cultural harmony through music.
Pandit Ravi Shankar was a musical genius but he remained a humble human being throughout his life.
God has been kind to me and I have been very lucky indeed to have gained recognition and appreciation almost all over the world.
His passing away from our midst has been a great loss to India and the world.
His legacy, however, lives on and will continue to illuminate the world of music.
Shri Rajiv Prasad Shaha, Managing Director, Kumudini Welfare Trust
Shrimati Shaha,
Miss Pratibha Mutsuddy, Director of Bharateshwari Home
Trustees and Staff Members of Kumudini Welfare Trust,
My dear students,
I am delighted to be here with you at Kumudini and the Bharateshwari Home for Girls.
You have put up an extraordinary performance which combines beauty with elegance, discipline and physical fitness.
I am truly impressed and overwhelmed by your talent and hard work.
Looking at all of you I can see that Bangladesh has a very bright future.
Each of you will one day go forth into the outside world.
The training and education that you are receiving here will equip you to become proud and productive citizens of your motherland.
You will be the makers of a new Bangladesh.
To everybody you are the representatives of the youth who aspire to see a beautiful future.
Our greetings to you, the youth of Bangladesh.
A growing number of girls are now attending school.
I congratulate the Government of Bangladesh for taking far reaching initiatives in the field of education such as compulsory primary education, free education for girls up to class ten, stipends for female students and distribution of free text books.
This however cannot be done by governments alone, and I am therefore glad that the Kumudini Trust has joined the national effort to impart quality education to girls in Bangladesh.
He and his family had dedicated themselves to the service of the suffering and the needy.
It is sad that not only Shri Ranada Prasad Shaha but also his family suffered considerably in the days before the creation of Bangladesh.
We respect them for their bravery and pay homage to their memory.
It is a tribute to him that the Kumudini Trust and its affiliated bodies have grown from strength to strength, and have served the nation so well.
The Kumudini hospital and medical college have been carrying out charitable work for the most needy and destitute.
You are fortunate to be studying in an institution which symbolizes the highest values of selfless service.
As a small token of support of the Government of India for your efforts, I am happy to announce that we will fund the upgradation of the sewerage system of your Complex which, I understand, has been a long pending need.
In addition, we will also fund the construction of an advanced waste water treatment plant system.
I am happy to be informed that the project will significantly change the landscape of the Complex and that the land saved from the installation of the waste water treatment system will be gainfully used for agriculture and other productive purposes.
I recall that some of you had met me as part of a Youth Delegation that visited Delhi last year.
Today, I am happy to be here to meet you and to see, for myself, this remarkable institution.
I am deeply impressed by what I have seen and have no doubt that you will be outstanding citizens of Bangladesh.
I wish each one of you the best of success and a bright future.
I am delighted to be here today in your midst at this historic venue.
You have given me an extraordinary welcome.
I am overwhelmed by the love and affection you have showered on me, and by this magnificent reception.
Bangladesh is the first country that I am visiting as President of India.
I have my roots in the soil of Bengal, and have imbibed its language, traditions and culture.
My wife was born in Narail and started her education here.
I have grown up reading the compositions of the same poets as you, listening to the same songs which both our people love and walked along the banks of the same rivers which inspire the songs that make us all similarly wistful.
When I was a child I never dreamt that one day I would come here as the President of my country.
I was overwhelmed by the spontaneous outpouring of support and goodwill that I received from the people of Bangladesh when I became the President of India.
I received many congratulatory messages from people from all walks of life and all parts of this country.
I take this opportunity to express my deep gratitude to the people of Bangladesh for their good wishes on that day.
Today, I stand on hallowed ground at this great University of Dhaka which will soon celebrate its centenary.
It has been a century of accomplishment and on this occasion of its convocation ceremony, I felicitate all the students of this University who have successfully graduated in their respective academic disciplines.
Dhaka University is the oldest and largest public University in Bangladesh.
Students who graduate today are following in the footsteps of the great alumni who passed through these portals in the generations before you.
Who can forget the day of February 21, 1952 when the students of Dhaka University defied the banning of public rallies by the then Government?
It was again the students of Dhaka University who heroically resisted the brutal attack on the night of March 25, 1971 that killed more than three hundred of their colleagues, faculty members and intelligentsia.
Today, when Bangladesh is free and liberated and is happily engaged in its own development, the sacrifices of its martyrs are vindicated.
It is because of them that the youth of Bangladesh are today able to call this land their own.
Young men and women like you are the engine of socio-economic development of our region.
The future of Bangladesh is in your hands.
You should know that you have a past which is steeped in glory, and a future that is full of promise.
I have been deeply impressed by the maturity, awareness and involvement of the youth of Bangladesh in the task of nation building.
As a Bengalee I am deeply involved in all that concerns Bengalees.
It is this extraordinary spirit of humanity and confidence that has been instrumental in the advancement of Bangladesh by leaps and bounds.
Bangladesh has emerged as one of the fastest growing economies in South Asia.
This is laudable.
I would compliment the government led by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina and the people of Bangladesh for their achievements in all aspects of human development.
In many social indicators, Bangladesh has acquitted itself in an exemplary manner.
You have made good progress and set new benchmarks in the amelioration of poverty, eradication of hunger and universalization of education.
While the poverty ratio in Bangladesh is about 31 percent, you have world class achievements on which the edifice of a prosperous and developed Bangladesh will be built.
I am sure that you, the youth of Bangladesh, will carry forward this great task with dedication.
If, today, Bangladesh has embraced democracy, it is largely due to the values and principles which its people held dear when they fought for their independence in 1971.
You have been steadfast.
You, better than anyone else, know that democracy means the ability to respect differences and allow the will of the people to prevail for the common good.
You know that it means respect for the rule of law and building of strong institutions along with free speech and a vibrant media.
I am confident that democratic traditions in Bangladesh will grow stronger with time and that you will preserve democracy with your constant vigil.
India and Bangladesh are interlinked like no other nations on earth.
Our destinies are interwoven just like our history and our geography.
Within our resources, India remains committed to supporting the comprehensive development of Bangladesh and the aspirations of its people.
We believe that India and Bangladesh must develop and grow together, ensuring that our growth provides more opportunities to both our peoples.
We need to work together to maximize the potential of our economic cooperation.
Bangladesh is uniquely placed to exploit its natural and human resources to emerge as a fast growing, modern economy.
Apart from the potential of its resources on land and sea, the geographical location of Bangladesh is an advantage that must be fully explored and exploited.
Bangladesh lies at the cross-roads of South and South-East Asia.
The idea of South Asian regional cooperation was born in Bangladesh.
Bangladesh has once again taken the leadership in moving towards sub-regional cooperation.
This will lead to practical results in terms of better water management, more electricity and grid connectivity, more trade and more cross-country movement of goods and people.
India and Bangladesh can lead the way towards greater integration within our region and beyond in South East Asia.
I am happy to note that both countries have made considerable progress in the implementation of the far-reaching decisions taken during these historic Visits.
I assure you that India remains committed to implementing the decisions that have been taken.
India and Bangladesh have vast opportunities to increase our bilateral trade and commerce.
Government of India has taken the first step by removing quota and duty restrictions from all categories of imports from Bangladesh except twenty five tariff lines.
Bangladesh now has duty-free access to our large market.
We are working with the Government of Bangladesh to remove the remaining non-tariff barriers, open more border haats and harmonise our respective standards.
The recently signed Revised Travel Arrangements between India and Bangladesh will lead to the liberalisation of visa arrangements between our countries.
These will particularly help businessmen, students, journalists, tourists and those travelling for medical treatment.
Greater people-to-people contacts and exchanges are the best way to bring our two countries even closer together.
I am happy with the progress made in the implementation of the Line of Credit extended by my Government to the Government of Bangladesh.
Several development projects, especially those pertaining to the railways sector, are now beginning to take off.
I was happy to see double decker buses purchased under the Line of Credit plying on the roads.
Many new Indian locomotives and wagons will soon be on the rail lines of Bangladesh.
We have offered a grant of 200 million US Dollars to Bangladesh for utilization in projects of priority to Bangladesh.
Our countries have also made considerable progress in our co-operation in the power sector.
The power grids of our countries will, for the first time in our post-independence history, be connected by the middle of this year.
This will allow the flow of 500 MW of power from India to Bangladesh.
The India-Bangladesh Friendship Power Company is setting up an ultra-modern super thermal 1320 MW power station at Rampal near Mongla to meet the energy needs of Bangladesh.
My Government proposes to introduce a Constitutional Amendment Bill in Parliament to give effect to the provisions of the Land Boundary Agreement with Bangladesh and its 2011 Protocol.
We are committed to working closely with Bangladesh to avoid any untoward incidents on our border.
We can together make it a gateway of peace and mutually beneficial cooperation.
The sharing of the waters of our common rivers is a high priority for us.
We have successfully forged agreements in the past and are hopeful of arriving at an early accord on the sharing of the Teesta waters.
Meanwhile, there are areas where we must substantially increase our cooperation, such as in information technology, skill development, agricultural research, environment protection, climate change, and in protecting the Sunderbans and harnessing energies, both traditional as well as new and renewable sources of energy.
We must invest more in the field of education.
There must be more exchanges of students, faculty, research scholars and academics between us.
Government of India offers a large number of scholarships for students and professionals from Bangladesh.
Many more students from Bangladesh are coming to India at their own cost to pursue higher studies.
The Indian Council for Cultural Relations has established a Tagore Chair and a Hindi Chair at Dhaka University.
These have contributed to greater academic exchanges between India and Bangladesh.
I was delighted to meet a 100-strong youth delegation, the first ever from Bangladesh, last year.
Many of the students were from the Dhaka University.
I am happy to note that a similar delegation will again visit India this year.
There is a lot that we, in India, can learn from you.
Looking at you, I am convinced that the future of Bangladesh is bright.
I wish you all every success in making the dream of Sonar Bangla a reality.
India will stand by your side as you shape the destiny of your country.
With these words, I accept, with utmost humility, the award of the Doctor of Laws Honoris Causa from Dhaka University.
I once again thank the Dhaka University for inviting me to be among you all today.
I take this opportunity of conveying, through you, the greetings of the people of India to the friendly people of Bangladesh.
Distinguished Members of the Cabinet of the Government of Bangladesh,
Your Excellency Mr. Muhammad Musharraf Hussain Bhuiyan,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Thank you for your warm words.
I am delighted to be here and am grateful for the affection with which I have been received.
This is my first State Visit abroad since I assumed the office of the President the Republic of India.
As I stand here tonight I am filled with memories of the events of 1971.
I was 36 years old and a Member of Parliament when the people of Bangladesh engaged themselves in their liberation struggle.
Many of us were passionately concerned about the events that were unfolding then.
These bulletins were keenly followed by us in India - as the minds and hearts of all Indians were with the people of Bangladesh.
The plight of millions of homeless people crossing the border, seeking refuge in the neighbouring States of India stirred the hearts of our people as they felt ine anguish of that hapless multitude.
They came forward wholeheartedly to succour and any assistance they could provide to their brethren from Bangladesh in their hour of need.
I recall that, on June 15, 1971, I had the privilege to initiate a discussion on the floor of the Rajya Sabha, the upper house of the Indian Parliament, when I suggested that India should accord diplomatic recognition to the Government of Bangladesh in exile in Mujibnagar.
My words are on the record in proceedings of Rajya Sabha.
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman recognized what had to be done and did not lose time in courageously taking the lead and achieving the cherished dream of independence for the proud people of Bangladesh.
Shrimati Indira Gandhi, the then Prime Minister of India without any hesitation translated the vision of Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru into action by extending the support to the people of Bangladesh.
As a Member of Indian Delegation in the 59th Conference of Inter Parliamentary Union in Paris (France) in 1971 from 2nd to 10th September, we took the opportunity of the presence of large number of Members of Parliaments of different countries to explain the situation in Bangladesh and urged them to prevail upon their Governments to speak out against the violation of human rights in Bangladesh.
I also had the privilege of visiting the United Kingdom and the then Federal Republic of Germany as a Member of the Goodwill Parliamentary Delegation in the same visit.
Therefore, I accept this distinction conferred on me with the greatest humility.
A few lines from a poem written by Annadashankar at that time will epitomise the sentiments we had about the liberation struggle of Bangladesh.
The author wrote and I am quoting in Bengali:
যতদিন রবে পদ্মা যমুনা
গৌরী মেঘনা বহমান |
ততদিন রবে কীর্তি তোমার
শেখ মুজিবুর রহমান
Your Excellency, I would like to thank you and the Government of Bangladesh for your gracious gesture in conferring on me the Bangladesh Liberation War Honour.
I thank you for remembering, in this manner, the contribution of the Indian brothers and sisters who were by your side, who stood shoulder to shoulder with you and even sacrificed their lives for your liberation.
The number of proud Indian citizens that have been honoured and accorded your hospitality in the last year is a tribute to our close friendship.
I thank you on their behalf and on behalf of India.
They showed us how even the weakest can triumph when the cause is righteous.
Your Government has redeemed its pledge with history.
Today, the children of the muktijoddhas are proud in the knowledge that the blood of their forefathers was not spilled in vain.
It is with pride that Bangladesh engages in the task of building a modern, progressive and prosperous nation.
As in 1971, so in 2013, the people of India stand beside the people of Bangladesh.
We will walk with you as equal partners, shoulder to shoulder, arm in arm.
We are both inheritors of an undivided civilizational legacy.
It is no wonder that India and her people share a special connection with Bangladesh.
We have an abiding interest in the all-round development of Bangladesh.
However, the full potential of our cooperation is yet to be tapped.
My discussions during this visit have been extremely rewarding.
Our Governments have established a comprehensive framework for cooperation.
Our endeavour will be to see how our bilateral cooperation can bring sustained benefits to our people and improve the quality of their lives.
This will be the litmus test of the success of our relationship.
The impressive and path-breaking manner in which Bangladesh has faced the challenges of eradication of poverty is worthy of emulation.
I pay tribute to the people of Bangladesh, its farmers, entrepreneurs, doctors, teachers, scientists and many others who represent the creative genius of its people.
I, personally, have a deep attachment with this land.
My wife has family roots here, as she spent a very early and happy part of her childhood here.
I am touched by your warm gesture.
I see in this award, a strong message of enduring friendship and brotherhood between India and Bangladesh.
I fully reciprocate this sentiment as I accept this honour bestowed on me with the deepest gratitude.
With these words, once again I thank Your Excellency President Zillur Rahman, Her Excellency, the Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina and the people of Bangladesh who have received me and my wife and members of my delegation with a warmth and affection that has touched us deeply.
I was delighted to witness the remarkable launch of the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) C20 SARAL Mission, along with six more satellites today.
It is a pleasure to be in the midst of distinguished scientists and technologists who have gathered here to celebrate the culmination of the meticulously executed chain of events and rigourous pre-launch preparations for the Mission.
I congratulate the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) for successfully executing this Mission.
I am confident that the SARAL spacecraft launched today would function as planned and perform as designed and serve the intended applications in Ocean Topography, Coastal Altimetry, Ocean currents monitoring and Animal migration studies worldwide.
The PSLV has become a household name in our country and this mission would only reaffirm this position through its efficacy, accuracy and reliability of this launch vehicle.
An important manifestation of India's bilateral cooperation with foreign countries is in the field of Space technology.
I congratulate the French space agency, Centre National d'etudes Spatiales (CNES), for whole-heartedly participating in this collaborative mission.
This mission epitomizes the spirit of the Indo-French partnership, which the two nations have shared for decades.
Curiosity is mankind's second nature and human beings have always sought to unearth the mysteries that lie beyond our Mother Earth.
The desire to know the unknown has driven us to inculcate a scientific temper for inquiry.
India's space programme is about half a century old though our rich legacy of astronomy dates back to Aryabhatta and Bhaskara.
It is heartening to note that in the road towards self-reliance, ISRO has played a vital role in the enhancement of technology levels and indigenization of strategic materials.
The Indian National Satellite System is today a proud repository of the largest group of communication satellites in the Asia Pacific region.
Our launch capabilities have been duly acknowledged the world over, with ISRO increasingly launching satellites of other countries.
This is true whether it is for ushering in a sustainable development paradigm, establish a strong agricultural sector, respond to climate change, building the rural sector amongst others.
Our space programme has all along been an application-oriented initiative, and hence, been an able partner in our development process.
We have used space applications to bring government closer to people, particularly those who are far removed from urban centers and reside in remote areas of the country.
Space-based applications like tele-education and tele-medicine have enabled greater access to our rural population to these basic needs.
The telemedicine project has made it possible for health care centres in remote locations to connect with super specialty hospitals in towns and cities through INSAT satellites for provision of health care facility to the needy and under-served population.
I am told that 1.5 lakh people are availing of the telemedicine facility annually.
The EDUSAT satellite has brought about a change in the way education is delivered in our schools, colleges and universities, including the non-formal education system.
Interactive education has made it possible to bring education closer to our students, particularly those located in under-served areas.
The Village Resource Centre initiative, which connects resource centres like Agricultural Universities, Skill Development Institutes and Hospitals for training of people in diverse fields such as agriculture, horticulture, fisheries, livestock, water resources, computer literacy, micro finance and vocational training, is commendable.
Over five lakh people have availed of this facility and I am sure many more will do so in the future.
Our farmers have hugely benefitted from weather forecasting as also tele-agriculture initiatives that educate them about different methods and techniques of farming.
Management of our natural resources has greatly relied on our remote sensing capabilities.
Such socially relevant uses of technology that meet our country's development goals are imperative to address the demands of our population.
Our endeavour must be to lower the cost of access to space through greater innovation and drive towards technology refinement.
ISRO enjoys tremendous trust amongst our countrymen.
This faith and confidence puts the onus back on the organization to raise the bar of its performance, scale greater heights and explore newer frontiers.
Over the past three years, ISRO has successfully accomplished an impressive array of 15 missions including CARTOSAT - 2B, MEGHATROPIQUES, RISAT-1 and a number of PSLV launches.
The entire nation is eagerly looking forward for the successful flight of the Geo-Synchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV), with the Indigenous Cryogenic Stage.
The planned experimental mission of GSLV Mark 3 is a huge step forward in the development of heavy-lift space transportation system in the country.
Our Chandrayaan-1 mission made the country proud.
I am also confident of the first Indian inter-planetary venture, The Mars Orbiter Mission, targeted for this year, to be successful and to place India into the ranks of the few Nations that have attempted such a feat.
ISRO should be in the forefront of such a movement.
I am certain that ISRO, with its team of able, energetic and committed professionals, will meet the future scientific and technological challenges and continue to be a nerve centre of innovation and creativity.
I wish ISRO every success in the missions to come.
It is a pleasure for me to be here on the occasion of this inaugural ceremony.
I am indeed happy to see that the participants in the symposium include delegates from our immediate neighbourhood - who will directly benefit from our country's progress in this field.
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, it is a good development that oral health care, as a science, has grown in popularity and there is, today, a greater awareness of dentistry as a profession in our country.
I am particularly pleased at the awareness that this conference will generate - at a time when there is still a deficiency of oral health care facilities in many cities and towns of India.
They were found to have used tooth shaped shells.
The conceptualization of economically viable dental implants that are available, affordable and accessible to all sections of society is a noteworthy milestone indeed.
The Indian Dental Association, in working towards this, is making an important contribution to our society.
I understand that dental implants today constitute the single largest growing dental specialty.
It is recognized as an important and popular subject of specialization and there is every justification for the science of implantology to be incorporated into dental education and given due priority in the curriculum of dental institutions throughout our country.
I am told that the Army Dental Corps, together with the DRDO are presently developing indigenous technology that can make implants all the more efficacious and readily available to our armed forces and civilian population.
I also gather that dental tourism as a concept has caught the imagination of foreign visitors who would like to take advantage of the high quality of implant services and related treatments that are more affordable in India.
I am glad to learn that the Dental Council of India proposes to take up the study of the epidemiology of oral diseases including dental caries, periodontal diseases and oral cancer.
I certainly subscribe to the view that preventive measures are as important as clinical intervention.
Although oral health should always be an inseparable companion of general health care, modern dentistry has evolved slowly in India.
A continuous assessment of ethical, socio-economical and legal implications should be taken up as a matter of course by our institutions and they must be accountable for the healthcare solutions adopted by them.
Every new methodology which successfully passes the mandatory trials and testing is, eventually and in each case, another success story, a welcome step forward by our scientific community.
I am sure that this symposium will have far reaching outcomes and also succeed in promoting co-operation among the participating students and professionals in the field of dental implantation.
I hope this session will be productive and useful.
Our youth, our greatest national asset, are a confident and courageous lot.
I have no doubt that their passion, energy and enterprise will take India to new heights.
People are concerned about the security of our women and children.
They are also anxious about timely delivery of their entitlements and about persisting social and economic inequality.
Europe is in recession.
Most emerging markets are growing very slowly.
It has been a difficult year for India also.
Both global and domestic factors have affected our growth.
We need to address the impact of both.
My Government has responded to the situation by taking several measures to revive investment activity and investor sentiment.
In due course, the Direct Benefits Transfer System will also cover wages and subsidies on food and LPG.
This system will help cut down leakages, bring millions of people into the financial system and lead to better targeting of beneficiaries.
A notable feature of the Plan was the progress towards achieving inclusiveness with a faster decline in poverty than in the previous decade.
The National Development Council has recently adopted the 12th Five Year Plan, which further sharpens the focus on faster, more inclusive and sustainable growth.
The 12th Plan recognises that growth outcomes will depend upon the extent to which we are able to take some difficult decisions.
The Plan proposes to consolidate Centrally Sponsored Schemes into a smaller number and increase their flexibility.
Real GDP grew by 5.4% in the first half of the current fiscal year.
This is significantly lower than the average of around 8% in the last decade.
Our slower growth is the consequence of a combination of global and domestic factors.
My Government is taking steps to deal with the factors responsible for the slowdown.
Inflation is easing gradually but is still a problem.
There has been a moderation in core inflation and recovery in growth is likely.
Policy measures announced during the year have also restored optimism at home and abroad.
The Government is also working with State Governments to reach a consensus on the Goods and Services Tax.
The growth in agriculture and allied sectors during the 11th plan was 3.7% compared to 2.4% in the 10th Plan.
This year, despite erratic and deficient rainfall, it is projected that we will produce more than 250 million tons of foodgrains.
The total stock of foodgrains with the public sector agencies was 662 lakh tons on 1st February 2013, including 307 lakh tons of wheat and over 353 lakh tons of rice.
My Government is committed to enacting the National Food Security Bill, having received the recommendations of the Standing Committee.
Sugarcane and cotton production have touched record levels in 2011-12.
An outlay ofSpeech29,296 crore has been earmarked under the Integrated Watershed Management Programme during the plan period.
A National Centre for Cold Chain Development has been constituted to give a fillip to the cold chain sector.
In order to meet the rapidly growing demand for milk, the Government has approved the National Dairy Plan Phase-I, which will help meet the projected national demand of 150 million tons of milk by 2016-17.
Construction of godowns is being promoted under Public Private Partnership mode.
Storage capacity of about 181 lakh tons will be created over the next two years across the country with additional storage space of 5.4 lakh tons in the North East.
During the 12th Plan, an additional 87 lakh hectares of irrigation potential is planned to be created under the Programme.
The New National Water Policy adopted recently by the National Water Resources Council emphasizes efficient use of water and the need to align planning for water resources with the challenges of climate change, equity, social justice and sustainability.
Around 5 crore households were provided employment under the scheme in 2011-12.
I am confident that the law will be enacted.
Meanwhile, the tenure of the current Mission has been extended until March 2014 for completion of ongoing projects and for sanction of new projects so as to maintain the momentum of development of urban infrastructure.
In order to give a push to capacity building efforts of Urban Local Bodies, the Government has decided to create a separate fund of Speech1,000 crore.
During 2012-13, 5% of the National Rural Drinking Water Programme Fund has been earmarked for allocation to States facing this problem.
A Rural Water Supply & Sanitation Project for Low Income States, estimated at nearly Speech5000 crore, is being developed with the help of the World Bank to assist States that are lagging behind in the coverage of piped water supply.
The Total Sanitation Campaign has been modified in the form of the Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan with the goal of providing access to sanitation for all rural households by the year 2022.
On attaining the age of 80 years, beneficiaries of both the schemes now migrate to Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme where they get a pension of Speech500 per month.
An amount of over Speech880 crore has been disbursed as scholarships to more than 55 lakh students till 31 December in 2012-13.
To encourage students belonging to minority communities to take up higher studies, an amount of Speech66 crore has been released under the Maulana Azad National Fellowship Scheme.
The Wakf Act is being amended and Wakf Development Corporation will be set up for development and protection of Wakf properties.
For financial inclusion, the flow of priority sector credit to minorities at the national level during 2012-13 reached Speech1,71,960 crore as on 30/9/2012, which was more than 15% of the total priority sector lending.
The Government recently launched the Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for students with disabilities to enable them to pursue higher education.
The Bill has been passed by the Lok Sabha.
My Government is also deeply concerned about incidents of sexual offences against women.
The Government has also begun to implement a series of administrative measures to improve the safety and security of women in the country.
Several new initiatives have been taken by the Government to make it more effective.
My Government is committed to expanding coverage under this programme to pre-primary schools in a progressive manner.
This programme will encourage states to develop comprehensive higher education plans in an integrated manner to address the issues of expansion, equity and excellence.
The number of ITIs that stood at 5114 in 2006-07, more than doubled to 10,344 by the end of 2012.
This is the longest polio-free period in the country ever since eradication efforts were launched.
During the same period, around 1.45 lakh medicare staff has been added in various States under the National Rural Health Mission.
To increase the availability of doctors and specialists, several reforms were initiated, resulting in a record increase of 46% MBBS seats and 70% Post Graduate seats in the last five years.
An overarching National Health Mission, covering both rural and urban areas, is being finalized.
Under the Janani Sishu Suraksha Karyakram, pregnant women are entitled to absolutely free care in public health institutions.
This national initiative will eventually cover around 270 million children across the country.
Life expectancy at birth has increased from 61.9 years in the period 1996-2000 to 66.1 years in the period 2006-2010.
The programme has reduced annual new HIV infections by 57% in the last decade.
Adult HIV prevalence has decreased from 0.40% in 2000 to 0.27% in 2011.
This insurance scheme has been extended to building and other construction workers, street vendors, beedi workers and other categories.
Therefore, it is imperative that the infrastructure deficit is overcome and adequate investment takes place.
Government has taken two major steps to ensure that impediments in this area are eliminated.
The second is the creation of Infrastructure Debt Funds to raise low-cost, long-term resources for refinancing infrastructure projects.
Under the National Manufacturing Policy, 12 National Investment & Manufacturing Zones stand notified, 8 of them along the Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor and 4 others at Nagpur, Tumkur, Chittor and Medak.
The Government has also liberalized the FDI policy in single-brand and multi-brand retail trading, air transport services, power exchanges and the broadcasting sector.
The E-Biz project has been launched to serve as a 24x7 online single window system for providing services to investors and businesses.
It envisages a roadmap for facilitating manufacture of electric and hybrid vehicles that are environment friendly and reduce our dependence on fossil fuels.
Six new National Institutes of Pharmaceutical Education & Research at Hyderabad, Gandhinagar, Hajipur, Kolkata, Guwahati and Raebareli have started functioning.
India became the largest exporter of rice in 2012-13.
The Bombay Stock Exchange and the National Stock Exchange launched Small and Medium Enterprises exchange platforms in 2012, making access to capital markets easier.
The Government amended the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 for more effective prevention of money laundering.
Through the disinvestment policy, we have broad-based people's ownership of Government enterprises.
Foreign tourist arrivals in India in 2012 were estimated at 6.65 million.
Kolkata and Chennai Airports now have new terminals.
Construction of over 1000 km route length is expected to begin shortly.
Construction of the Banihal-Qazigund tunnel in Jammu & Kashmir has been completed and work on starting train services is in progress.
A new approach to road construction, the EPC mode, has been put in place.
This will ensure significant cost and time savings compared to traditional contracting methods.
A length of 2900 km of highways will be put under the Operate, Maintain and Transfer system, which will improve road maintenance.
To improve connectivity from Kashmir Valley to Kargil-Ladakh region, a tunnel of 6.5 km has already been approved and another tunnel of 13 km is planned.
This would ensure all weather connectivity.
The Government proposes to establish two new major ports, one at Sagar Island in West Bengal and the other in Andhra Pradesh with a total additional capacity of around 100 Million Tonnes Per Annum.
After resolving pending issues, 46 Fuel Supply Agreements were signed by CIL with power utilities.
Following the notification of the new Auction by Competitive Bidding Rules, my Government is in the process of allocation of 17 coal blocks to Government companies, as a first step.
Geological Survey of India has planned to complete the geophysical and geochemical mapping of highly promising 5.71 lakh square km area during the 12th Plan.
For developing deep sea mineral exploration capability, an Ocean Going Research Vessel is likely to be commissioned in 2013.
The total installed capacity stood at about 2 lakh MW at the end of the 11th Plan.
To meet the projected demand by the end of the 12th Plan, the targeted capacity addition in the Plan is 88,537 MW.
This would help settle loans worth more than Speech1.85 lakh crore that the power utilities owe to financial institutions.
The country has an installed capacity of over 26,400 MW from various renewable energy sources, which is over 12% of the country's total power generation capacity.
With more than 935 million telephone connections, the Indian telecom network is the second largest in the world.
Tele-density was 76.75% in October, 2012 with rural tele-density crossing 40%.
The Government approved the National Telecom Policy-2012 which lays down the vision and strategic direction for the telecom sector.
Two and a half lakh Gram Panchayats will be connected with broadband facility under the National Optical Fibre Network project by December 2014.
Computers will be provided to 1,30,000 post offices, which would facilitate both postal and banking services at post offices.
The total employment in IT Software and Services touched 2.8 million in 2011-12, with an annual growth of about 9%.
The National Policy on Information Technology has been approved.
This will be extended to other cities in a phased manner.
The first phase of the National Museum of Indian Cinema is proposed to be dedicated to the nation at Gulshan Mahal, Mumbai.
The first award will be given posthumously to late Pandit Ravi Shankar.
A National Mission for Libraries commenced its work in 2012.
My Government has decided to put in place a long-term plan for training of sports-persons in select disciplines.
My Government also intends to put in place a new system for identification of sports talent from the panchayat to the district level.
My Government is determined to thwart any attempt at disturbing our communal peace and harmony.
In order to control the violence, adequate army and paramilitary forces were deployed.
The State Government set up relief camps and provided basic amenities to the affected people.
The Central Government announced a package of Speech300 crore for relief and rehabilitation efforts.
The number of deaths in naxal violence declined from 611 in 2011 to 414 in 2012.
A new scheme for construction and strengthening of 400 police stations has been started in the affected areas.
The first phase of the plan for improving road connectivity in 34 most affected districts at a cost of Speech7,300 crore is likely to be completed by March, 2015.
The number of tourists visiting Jammu & Kashmir has increased from 8.99 lakh in 2011 to 12.37 lakh in 2012.
Compared with 2011, the number of fatalities in incidents of terrorist violence in 2012 declined by nearly half.
Under the placement linked scheme named Udaan, proposals of corporate houses to train nearly 25,000 youth from Jammu & Kashmir have already been approved.
Under another placement linked skill development initiative called Himayat, more than 1650 youth from the state have been trained, of which over 650 have been employed.
In addition to the work of border fencing, roads and floodlighting along the borders with Bangladesh, Pakistan and Myanmar, Government has decided to undertake the construction of 509 additional border outposts along the Indo-Bangladesh and Indo-Pakistan border.
The Integrated Check Post at Attari was operationalised in April, 2012.
My Government will provide the GTA financial assistance of Speech200 crore per annum for 3 years for development of socio-economic infrastructure.
This will be over and above the normal plan assistance to the State of West Bengal.
My Government is also considering amendments to the Prevention of Corruption Act to punish the guilty and protect the honest public servants more effectively.
Over 14,000 District and Subordinate Courts are being equipped with the tools of information and communication to provide quality citizen-centric services to litigants.
As one of its foremost priorities, Government will endeavour to establish Gram Nyayalayas for ensuring affordable and expeditious justice to the common man.
My Government proposes to introduce the Judicial Standards and Accountability Bill in this session as a significant initiative towards judicial reforms.
The country is united in paying tribute to our soldiers who have made the supreme sacrifice by laying down their lives for the country.
My Government will continue to take all necessary steps to modernize and equip our Armed Forces; bolster defence infrastructure, especially in the border areas; encourage indigenous defence R&D; and expand domestic production of defence equipment.
The continuing progress in our missile programme has strengthened our deterrence capability.
Coastal security has also been further strengthened.
Significant steps have been taken to enhance the pay and pension of serving and retired Services personnel and to remove disparities.
This will benefit over 13 lakh personnel.
We attach the highest priority to relations with our immediate neighbours.
With Pakistan, we have made progress towards normalization of relations, strengthening mechanisms for bilateral trade and facilitating greater people-to-people contact.
While we remain committed to taking the process forward, it is also important that Pakistan abides by its commitments and desists from acts that contribute to a trust deficit.
As Afghanistan prepares for the political and security transition in 2014 and beyond, we will continue to help Afghanistan evolve peacefully and fight terrorism and extremism.
In West Asia and North Africa, my Government supports efforts to promote peaceful settlement of conflicts and resolution of disputes in a manner that accommodates the democratic aspirations of the people.
We are also mindful of the fact that the Gulf region is home to nearly six million Indians who live and work there and that we depend on the region for the bulk of our energy requirements.
We have further enhanced our political engagement with and economic assistance to countries of Africa.
Our multi-faceted relationship with Japan, which is also a major partner in our infrastructure development efforts, is making good progress.
The privileged and strategic partnership we have built with Russia received a further boost during the visit of President Valdimir Putin in December 2012.
The visit of President Francois Hollande to Delhi in February 2013, his first Asian destination as President, will further strengthen our friendship and broad-based strategic cooperation with France.
We intensified efforts to generate momentum for early reform of the United Nations Security Council.
We are also seeking concerted international action against piracy.
In addition, a Piracy Bill was introduced in the Parliament last year for prosecution in India of persons committing piracy.
We hosted the fourth BRICS Summit in New Delhi in March 2012 and the ministerial meet of the Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation in October 2012.
The Government launched the Mahatma Gandhi Pravasi Suraksha Yojana on a pilot basis in May 2012 to provide emigrant Indian workers benefits like life insurance cover, pensions and Return and Resettlement savings.
We also signed Social Security Agreements with Finland, Canada, Japan and Sweden.
Similar agreements with Austria and Portugal will be signed soon.
The launch of the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle on 9 September 2012 marked our 100th space mission.
India's first remote sensing satellite RISAT-1, with all-weather imaging capability, was also launched in 2012.
Several space missions are planned for 2013, including India's first mission to Mars and the launch of our first navigational satellite.
Electricity generation from nuclear power plants increased by about 23% in 2011-12 over the previous year.
This year, two units of the nuclear power plant at Kudankulam, established with Russian collaboration, will be commissioned.
My Government attaches the highest priority to the safety of nuclear power plants.
A Bill to set up a Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority has been introduced in Parliament.
We have also conducted internal technical reviews of all safety systems of nuclear power plants in the country.
In addition, we are working with the International Atomic Energy Agency on all nuclear safety issues.
In order to popularize science education in schools, nearly 7.30 lakh scholarships have been awarded under a scheme called Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research.
About 48% of the awardees are girls and 25% belong to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
The Indian tsunami early warning system was recognized as the Regional Tsunami Service Provider for the Indian Ocean region in October 2012.
The event provided India with an opportunity to consolidate, scale-up and showcase its strengths in the field of biodiversity.
One of the most important outcomes of this Conference was the commitment made by the Parties to double the total biodiversity-related international financial resource flows to developing countries by 2015.
India stands tall as a nation because we are seen as a liberal and plural democracy, which has faced and overcome tremendous odds.
While we should rejoice in the benefits that our plurality brings, the challenge is to relentlessly pursue our efforts to accelerate economic growth and widen opportunities within our democratic framework.
It is only if we constantly renew and defend the democratic values that define our nationhood that we will be able to face the great challenges that lie before us.
On behalf of my Government, I appeal to all of you to support our endeavours in marching ahead as a proud nation.
This prize, instituted in the name of our former Prime Minister, Late Shrimati Indira Gandhi, celebrates the values that she stood and fought for in the service of our nation and its people.
She was a true leader of the people, who championed the cause of the poor and the deprived and who tirelessly pursued peace and universal disarmament for the betterment of human society.
Every year, we recognize serious, creative efforts by individual or an entity for working towards the ideals that Shrimati Indira Gandhi embodied.
Shrimati Indira Gandhi believed that human beings have a collective destiny, and hence, it is their duty to work jointly to establish and maintain peace in the world.
She adhered to a positive notion of peace that entailed a strong conviction to human welfare.
Peace and development are intrinsically linked to one another.
Unless progress touches all sections of society, peace will not only be fragile but also lead to tensions that result inevitably in dangerous manifestations.
Shrimati Gandhi was unflinching in her concern for the poor and the disadvantaged.
She also founded the SEWA Cooperative Bank in 1974, which has an outreach of 3 million women.
These simple figures speak volumes of the dedicated efforts of Ms. Bhatt and her team in successfully bringing women out of poverty into a life of self-confidence and esteem.
If women are under represented in the productive efforts of our economy, it is not only injudicious but also detrimental to the cause of social progress.
Due to the untiring efforts of Ms. Bhatt, SEWA has become an effective vehicle for promotion of self employment and self reliance amongst women.
To realize these goals, the organization has been providing support services in the areas of savings and credit, health care, child care, legal aid, insurance, capacity building and communication.
She is credited with playing an important role in the formation of several international initiatives aimed at collective progress through social mobilization.
Women comprise 48.5 per cent of our total population.
Though the overall sex ratio has increased by 7 during the decade 2001 to 2011, the ratio of 940 females per 1000 male population in 2011 is disappointing figure and reflects the distance that remains in achieving true equality.
The literacy rate amongst women has increased from 53.7 per cent in 2001 to 65.5 per cent in 2011.
However female literacy still lags behind male literacy by 16.7 per cent.
Surveys have indicated that the female hourly wage rates in agriculture also vary from 50 to 75 per cent of the male wage rates.
Empowerment of women is the key to not only meeting the objective of gender equality but also to elicit full participation from all our citizens in nation-building.
We must strengthen the systems and processes that facilitate women to take control and claim ownership of their lives.
To lend true meaning to empowerment, we have to expand their freedom of choice.
As poor women are often incapacitated to act individually, social mobilization for their economic redemption is a critical necessity.
Participatory institution building through self-help groups has been found to be one of the most effective tools for the empowerment of women in developing countries.
The number of such self-help groups is increasing, with a growth rate of 9.2, 14.8 and 3.3 per cent during 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12 respectively.
The micro-finance initiatives based on mutual or self-help method is conducive for women empowerment, as by emphasizing on group ownership, control and management and collective decision making, women also become prepared for participation in local governance structures.
I am happy that India is a proud repository of such initiatives best exemplified by model organizations like SEWA.
The prize bestowed upon Ms. Bhatt today is a tribute to her unflinching zeal towards the betterment of women in society and progress of humanity.
I urge SEWA to continue to expand the outstanding work it does aimed at promotion of entrepreneurship amongst poor women.
The defining feature of any democracy is that it replaces the rule of men by the rule of law and achieves this by creating institutions of governance and processes for their functioning.
The challenges of governance are always enormous.
It is more so, in a country that has 17.5% of the world's population but only 2.4 per cent of land resources and 4.2% of world's natural resources with a society which is multi-cultural, multi-lingual and multi religious.
The challenges are compounded by development issues faced by around 355 million people living in poverty line.
From the time of its birth, India has continued to face the challenges of poverty and development.
To meet these challenges, the institutions have to adapt and adopt new strategies and must redefine themselves from time to time.
There is therefore a need for discussion and debate about the functioning of our Constitutional institutions, to measure their growth and to judge their performance with a view to strengthening them.
Our Constitution recognized individual rights and community rights and gave them primacy by calling them fundamental rights, making them enforceable and giving power to our courts to act as a bulwark against any attempt to restrict or curb them.
Our founding fathers were not unaware of the potential conflict between the Judiciary and Executive and Legislature or either one, but they had faith in the power of public opinion - the ultimate symbol of political sovereignty.
They knew that the different wings of government would learn to co-exist and work together for the benefit of the nation and its people.
Our Constitution spells out the aspirations of the founding fathers.
The guidance for the government, in the form of Directive Principles of the State Policy, is contained in Part-IV of the Constitution.
A written instrument even as elaborate and lengthy as the Indian Constitution is never exhaustive.
A constitution is a charter for the governance of a nation and its jurisprudence is dynamic and constantly evolving.
The notion of what is good governance must be defined by the need of the times and enriched by the experience of the decades.
Yet, it enshrines certain timeless values that can never be compromised.
It is our duty to identify these values and to measure our performance on the touchstone of these values.
The Preamble records the resolve of the people of India to be secular.
It records the resolve to secure to all citizens justice, liberty, equality and fraternity.
How far have we achieved these and what is the task ahead?
There have been aberrations and every communal conflict, irrespective of its magnitude, scars the conscience of our nation.
The problem is now exacerbated by terrorism that professes religious underpinnings.
The challenge of any democracy is to adhere to basic values of civilized behavior and respect human rights and civil liberties in the face of provocation.
There have been measures of social justice which over the decades have slowly but surely shown results.
Abolition of untouchability is one such measure.
However, much needs to be done to achieve greater social justice, particularly gender justice.
To achieve social justice requires not mere governance but the transformation of social ethos, a recasting of mindsets and that is the job not just of the legislature, the executive or the courts, but of each one of us.
Political justice is one of the fronts in which we can look back with a degree of satisfaction.
The continuing empowerment of the marginalised sections of the society is a testimony to the manner in which political justice has been successfully achieved.
The ultimate goal of any democracy is the empowerment of the individual, irrespective of his economic, religious or social standing.
This may appear to be a utopian dream for many, but the strength of a system lies in its capacity to ceaselessly work for its accomplishment.
We owe ourselves to create a system in which access to politics is not limited to a privileged few but an average Indian also feels empowered enough to contribute.
We have achieved this in some measure though.
Some of our finest public figures have had humble beginnings and demonstrate how perseverance and determination triumph adversity.
Economic development is vital to good governance.
We cannot distribute the wealth which we do not possess and therefore production of wealth must necessarily be one of the predominant objectives of state policy.
However, this again must be imbued with the principle of equality with which there can be no compromise.
An egalitarian society can only be created when growth is inclusive.
It is important to ensure that there is justice and equality of opportunity and the state does not create conditions in which the privileged few gain at the cost of the multitudes who suffer endemic poverty.
A sustainable society can only be based on the principles of egalitarianism.
We have achieved a significant degree of federalism, the living proof of this success being the political reality that aspirations of regional parties are finding a due place in government formation at the Centre.
The Constitutional machinery of dispute resolution is a measure of last resort.
Adjudicative resolution of complex federal problems is never satisfactory.
There is no substitute for statesmanship and good sense.
Problems of governance reflected in disputes of these kinds must be resolved by rising above partisan political interest in a spirit of nationalism and in true adherence to the principles that democracy is about sharing and sharing alike.
This would need to change.
We cannot achieve true progress unless the governance improves.
Not one section is responsible for the ills.
The society on the whole has to reset its moral compass.
Of late, the judiciary has been perceived to have assumed an expanded role.
Some of this is the inevitable consequence of the innovative interpretation of rights, civil and political, enshrined in the Constitution.
As is inevitable, the Courts at times are perceived as having strayed into areas which are best left to the executive government or to the policy makers in the legislature.
The separation of powers is a Constitutional feature over which there has never been any doubt, and should be respected at all times.
It is indeed a happy occasion for me to join you at the Inaugural Ceremony of the twentieth edition of the biennial International Engineering and Technology Fair (IETF), being organized by the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII).
Over the last four decades, IETF has transformed from being a small event for the engineering industry to one of the largest and most prestigious exhibitions in Asia.
I commend CII for guiding the course of this event, which has helped position India firmly on the global engineering map.
With participation by over 350 national and international companies and conduct of 10 sector-focused fairs in this edition of IETF, I am confident that it will continue to build strategic business partnership, drive innovation and create synergy.
I am happy to note that Republic of Korea is the partner country for this edition.
India and Republic of Korea enjoy close and warm relations that extend to multiple dimensions.
Economic and commercial cooperation between our countries is strong given that leading Korean companies are major participants in our economy.
Korean companies have built immense brand recall in the Indian market for the high quality and standards of their products.
I am told that 72 Korean companies are participating in this exhibition to showcase products from a range of sectors such as tools and machinery, chemicals and transport.
It is gratifying to know that China is the focus country in this event.
The IETF has been organized at a time when the world is beginning to emerge from the second-round impact of the global economic crisis.
India too has felt the repercussions of global slowdown.
Though our economic growth has recently declined somewhat, I am confident that we will be able to bring the deceleration to a halt and revert to the 8 per cent plus growth levels that we attained many times in the past.
The underlying growth impetus remains strong due to continued rise in per capita incomes, expanding middle-class consumers and a young and energetic workforce.
I believe that stronger efforts from all stakeholders collectively can build on this trend to secure a faster growth as the global economy revives.
Our thrust on infrastructure development and industrial production provide further fillip to the sector, creating high demand for products across the engineering spectrum from machinery and automotives to power equipment, electronics, and advanced manufacturing.
Special initiatives have been taken to support key sub-sectors, with policies dedicated to automotives, electronics, chemicals and petrochemicals, and heavy machinery, among others.
Clusters and growth corridors across the country facilitate competitiveness as centers such as Pune, Chennai and Bengaluru have attained global acclaim for their high quality products.
India enjoys strong competencies in engineering, with advantages in design, new product development and time-to-market capacities.
As services input for manufacturing industries expand, India with its capabilities in services sector can play a bigger role in knowledge inputs for the engineering industry.
A large number of global firms are already taking advantage of these benefits by establishing their research and development centers in India.
These Zones would bring together state-of-the-art infrastructure, latest technology, skill development facilities, and rapid connectivity to emerge as hubs of manufacturing growth.
Large amount of investment is envisaged in key sectors such as power, transportation and urban development, a considerable portion of which is expected to come from the private sector.
This will create opportunity for businesses operating in the engineering sector.
For that, companies would need to address productivity and competitiveness.
I strongly believe that there is another milestone to be crossed in the quality and productivity journey.
New operating models would need to be considered such as flexible automation, multi-location production, deferred customization and disposable factories.
People should be at the heart of the engineering effort, reaching out to human resources, consumers and vendors.
The contribution of manufacturing to total employment in India is about 11 per cent, which is lower than that of the emerging countries where the share of manufacturing in total employment is between 15 to 30 per cent.
The National Manufacturing Policy, 2011 has envisaged the creation of 100 million additional jobs in the manufacturing sector by 2025.
To make Indian Industry productive and competitive, we must enhance our capabilities on many fronts, primarily human skill, hardware technology, and knowledge base.
Innovation is a key managerial strategy for growth.
We must lay emphasis on its various dimensions such as process innovation, product innovation, business model innovation and new technology innovation.
Strong capabilities in designing and building machine tools are particularly critical.
Industry must also develop close partnerships with universities and research institutions to take this aspiration forward.
A sustainable development model is not only an imperative today but is also opening new opportunities for the industrial sector.
Indian Industry should focus on reducing carbon footprint and devising green technologies.
Solar energy and other renewable energy markets are expected to grow strongly.
Opportunities in green products such as green buildings, bio fuels, and green technologies such as nanotechnology and artificial intelligence should be explored.
The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) sector has come to occupy an important position in our economy.
It contributes about 45 per cent of the manufacturing output and about 40 per cent of total exports of our country.
In over 29 million MSME units, about 69 million persons are employed.
A dynamic entrepreneurship is providing a new energy and drive to the MSME sector.
We need to strongly support engineering MSME units which are seedbeds of innovation.
Their rising participation in the engineering value chain would impart a new dynamism to the engineering sector.
I am told that the IETF has dedicated platforms for showcasing technologies and advances in these sectors.
I look forward to seeing some of the exciting new technologies and products on display.
Let me conclude by again congratulating CII for organizing this event, bringing the engineering world together with the Indian industry.
I am indeed happy to be present this morning at the opening of the 4th GRIHA National Conference on Green Design today.
Ladies & Gentlemen,
The continuing increase in the Indian population and growth of the Indian economy, along with rapid urbanization has led to an enormous demand for buildings.
This in turn is leading to a huge increase in demand for electricity in new and existing buildings.
Simultaneously, the diminishing availability of water is becoming a serious challenge.
Buildings consume a substantial amount of energy.
In 2011-12 the share of construction sector in GDP was about 7.8%.
However, the share of electricity consumption by the buildings sector alone is about 35% of the total electricity consumption in India.
As per reports of the Planning Commission, the energy supply must grow at a rate between 6.5 per cent and 7 per cent per annum in order to meet the 9 per cent growth rate (during the Twelfth Five Year Plan) of the Indian economy.
This means that India would need to add about 76000 MW capacity of power (approximately 15000 MW power capacity per year) through the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
This is not an easy task.
Hence, it is essential that demand management becomes a priority.
Therefore, increased energy efficiency in the building sector and utilization of renewable energy are key strategies to contain this form of growing energy demand.
To achieve sustainability, the policy makers at all levels need to address the environmental pressures due to increased demand for resources, and a rapidly changing climate.
Several policy and regulatory mechanisms have been devised to address the urban challenges, and are being implemented through national plans and programmes.
The Environmental Clearance process is in place to ensure efficiency in resource use for large projects.
The Energy Conservation Building Code (ECBC) is also applicable to air conditioned commercial buildings with connected load more than 100 kW and the Solar Buildings Programme for Energy Efficient Buildings has been formulated for implementation by the designated State agencies and municipal bodies.
However, much more needs to be done in this regard.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
A perceived notion of high costs of green buildings, lack of clarity in the domain of application, deficiencies in the area of integration and uniformity of various codes and standards, lack of disincentives for non-compliance, agencies and systems working in silos have added to the impediments in the implementation of sustainable habitats.
Lack of awareness about the expected gains is also a major obstacle while ensuring large scale implementation of sustainable habitats.
It is heartening to know that GRIHA is addressing these issues and gaps to a large extent.
It is imperative that in the light of looming challenges of water and electricity availability, States where a significant part of construction is yet to take place should ensure construction of sustainable habitats.
All Central Ministries need to promote this in their respective sectors.
Adoption of GRIHA by the Central Public Works Department (CPWD) and the National Building Construction Corporation Ltd. (NBCC) should give a fillip to both the public and private sector to construct environment friendly buildings in a big way.
The urban bodies must also make certain aspects compulsory while introducing a set of incentives and disincentives so that developers fall in line and the bigger houses and complexes also follow this approach.
I also congratulate all the recipients of the GRIHA awards for demonstrating environmental responsiveness, energy efficiency and for making significant efforts to adopt renewable energy integration in their respective buildings.
I hope others would emulate and benefit from the examples set through these buildings.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I extend my best wishes for the success of this Conference and hope that the deliberations which will take place here, promote creation of sustainable habitats all over the country, the GRIHA way.
Your Excellency, President Francois Hollande,
President of the French Republic,
Madame Valerie Trierweiler,
Shri Mohammad Hamid Ansari, Vice President of India,
Dr. Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is indeed a great pleasure to welcome Your Excellency and Madame Valerie Trierweiler on your first State Visit to India.
Our Government is particularly honoured that you have chosen India as the first country in Asia for such a visit.
It is a matter of satisfaction that your delegation includes several distinguished Ministers of your Cabinet.
Your visit to India is yet another occasion to celebrate the high level of understanding between India and France.
It has thrived on our mutual respect, regular dialogue and constructive exchanges.
In the people to people context, we have a unique history.
Indians have sacrificed their lives alongside French soldiers in some of the fiercest fighting on French soil during the First World War and in other theatres during the Second.
The people of India have held France in great esteem.
We have admired her open society and its rich legacy of artistic expression, literature and philosophy.
The writings of Rene Descartes found resonance in the works of our own great philosophers; and Nobel Laureate, Romain Rolland, who published his conversations with Tagore and Mahatma Gandhi, was strongly influenced by our philosophy of Vedanta.
True to his prophetic words, our enduring friendship, marked by our bilateral co-operation in diverse sectors has had rewarding outcomes to our mutual benefit.
As a result we have, today, more than 700 French enterprises invested in India; and Indian companies are increasingly exploring opportunities in France.
Our bilateral trade has grown to almost 9 billion US Dollars in 2011-12 and France is today the 9th largest foreign investor in India.
Our joint initiatives which include technology transfer and collaborative development in the strategic areas of space, defence production and civil nuclear co-operation have been particularly successful.
We have a long standing and fruitful collaboration in the railways sector.
The Indo French Centre for the Promotion of Advanced Research, has set an example that other countries seek to emulate.
Excellency, the success of our joint efforts reminds us that India and France have similar aspirations.
While preserving the advantages of globalization, we are both committed to working bilaterally and multilaterally to shape a new global agenda for inclusive growth.
We both agree on the need to revitalise global governance and the reform of its principal organs.
India desires to see that her external environment is secure so that our country can develop in peace.
We are concerned when there is instability in our region; and we value constructive consultations with all concerned on the issues that must be addressed carefully.
The sea lanes in the Indian Ocean, similarly, are threatened by acts of piracy, evoking the necessity of closer co-ordination in maritime security.
As countries that have repeatedly experienced terrorist attacks, we must give due priority to addressing the threats to international peace and security posed by terrorists and their facilitators.
I have no doubt that under your leadership, our strategic partnership will continue to progress and mature in the years to come.
With these words, I once again welcome Your Excellency, President Hollande, Madame Valerie Trierweiler and your distinguished delegation.
I invite you to please join me in raising a toast:
- To the good health and personal well-being of President Francois Hollande and Madame Valerie Trierweiler;
- To the progress and prosperity of the friendly people of France; and
- To lasting friendship between India and France.
I am delighted to participate in the presentation ceremony of the National Awards for the Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities.
Today, we honor differently-abled individuals, who by the strength of their indomitable will and their remarkable courage, have many achievements.
Awards have also been given to Institutions, which have made outstanding contributions to the empowerment of persons with disabilities.
Their work is exemplary and shows sensitivity to the needs of fellow human beings.
This is an occasion to acknowledge the dignity and rights of Persons with Disabilities (PwDs) and to re-dedicate ourselves to their empowerment.
Persons with disabilities, often face barriers for participating in all aspects of society.
These barriers can take a variety of forms; those relating to physical environment or access to information, or those resulting from legislation or policy or from societal attitudes or discrimination.
The result is that persons with disabilities do not have equal access in society to services, including education, employment, health care, transportation, political participation or at times justice.
Experience shows that when these barriers to their inclusion are removed, persons with disabilities participate fully in societal life and the entire community benefits.
Barriers faced by persons with disabilities are, therefore, a detriment to society as a whole and reasonable accommodation is necessary to achieve progress and development for all.
We, as a nation, are committed to the full empowerment of persons with disabilities.
The signing and ratification by India of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD), which came into effect in May 2008, symbolizes our resolve to move forward on the agenda to provide differently-abled citizens of our country with an environment for their full development and equal participation in the life of the nation.
The Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights & Full Participation) Act of 1995, is our main legislation dealing with persons with disabilities.
The Government is in the process of replacing it with a more comprehensive new Legislation in consonance with the UNCRPD.
I understand that this is a holistic piece of legislation which would entail major responsibilities not merely on the Central Government, but also on State Governments, local bodies, and even private service providers.
I, therefore, urge the Government to complete the remaining stages of consultation expeditiously, and to introduce the Bill in Parliament as early as possible.
As policy framework is strengthened, we must reinforce our efforts to have better delivery mechanisms for implementation of schemes and programmes, including through effective partnerships with the private sector and civil society.
Effective delivery can be the only way in which we can see smiles on the faces of those affected by disabilities.
I am happy to note that Government has created a separate Department of Disability Affairs last year.
I wish the new department all success.
I urge all State Governments to have a similar arrangement in order to give more focus to the issues confronting persons with disabilities.
Persons with Disabilities must be enabled through education to get adequate opportunities for gainful employment and their rightful status in society.
While the goal of inclusive and universal education is being pursued under the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, there is also a need to ensure that children with special needs have access to education, by providing the right kind of teaching-learning environment, material in accessible format and barrier-free educational institutions.
There is, therefore, an urgent need to train teachers in adequate numbers to provide education to children with disabilities.
We need to remove physical barriers that do not allow persons with disabilities to have access to various facilities and services.
Various assistive devices are needed to enable persons with disabilities to lead their lives with independence.
Simple aids like hearing devices, limb prosthesis, wheelchairs and Braille writing equipment facilitate mobility and communication, and substantially improve functional capacity.
It is essential to make aids and computer software and accessories available to all persons with disabilities at a reasonable cost, so that they have equal opportunity for enhancement and actualization of their inherent potential.
Economic empowerment of persons with disabilities needs focused attention.
Government is mandated to provide reservation in employment to persons with disabilities.
All Central Government Ministries and organizations under their control must take immediate and comprehensive steps to ensure that reservation for this category is effectively implemented in letter and spirit.
Backlog of vacancies in all establishments in the Government Sector should be filled as early as possible.
I also request the private sector to employ more and more persons with disabilities in their establishments and industries.
I am happy that today we are awarding employers of persons with disabilities.
This shows that private sector can also play a commendable role in appreciating their special abilities.
There is a need to provide training to persons with disabilities so that they can acquire appropriate skills.
The government as well as public and private sectors should work hand in hand to improve skill levels of persons with disabilities, thereby enhancing their employability.
I am informed that a large number of States have not yet appointed full-time independent State Commissioners for Persons with Disabilities though this ombudsman institution is an integral part of the existing Persons with Disabilities Act and such a mechanism is also envisaged in the UNCRPD.
I urge State Governments to appoint full-time independent State Commissioners for Persons with Disabilities at the earliest possible and to equip them with the wherewithal to function effectively for grievance redressal of the persons with disabilities.
For many children, the presence of an impairment leads to lack of participation in activities that are part of a normal childhood.
Women with disabilities are doubly disadvantaged on account of their gender as well as disability.
Elderly persons with disability, in the twilight of their lives, are likely to be neglected and exploited.
They need special consideration.
While addressing the needs of those with disabilities, it is important that attention should also be on preventive measures.
The possibilities of children in the 0 to 6 age group being afflicted by conditions that can lead to disabilities, can be reduced by precautionary measures such as immunization at the right age, control of diseases and infections, improvement of hygiene, better nutrition and better access to healthcare.
Government anganwadi workers should be specially sensitized and trained to identify children with disabilities to facilitate earliest possible intervention.
In conclusion, I congratulate the awardees and convey my best wishes to them for the future.
I hope you will inspire many more to come forward and work tirelessly in the cause of disability.
Also award winning institutions have demonstrated dedication and commitment and their example will certainly encourage others to come forward to work tirelessly in our effort to make our society more disabled friendly.
Let us all, on this occasion, pledge to do our best for the empowerment of persons with disabilities.
It gives me immense pleasure to be here for the opening of the 27th Surajkund International Crafts Mela.
I recall that in 1987, the Mela was first hosted at a very modest scale - on a small ground of about 3 acres.
I am happy to learn that as per previous attendance, more than a million domestic and foreign visitors are expected to visit the Mela during the next fortnight.
The participation of our friends from a number of countries with whom we have civilisational ties is a symbol of its success.
The mela has been instrumental, in its own way, in building cultural linkages between communities of craftsmen and artisans in India and abroad.
This congregation of more than 800 artistes and artisans from the widest range of the folk art and traditions of India affords an excellent opportunity to them display and popularise their products.
It is an occasion for visitors to enrich their knowledge and understanding of this aspect of the cultural heritage our country, its art and handicrafts exhibited here.
School children and tourists will have the opportunity to enjoy the vibrant rural ambience and directly interact with these gifted people.
Thanks to the commitment and dedication of these craftsmen to the preservation of several ancient art forms, several unique traditions are being saved from extinction.
Our handicrafts and traditional arts represent our Indian way of life.
It is an embodiment of our aesthetics and our skilled craftsmanship.
Our handicrafts and traditional arts are a highly decentralised activity, inspired by the local milieu and, in every case, based on local traditions, using local material and resources.
These art forms have sustained generations, providing sustainable livelihood and socio-economic development at the grassroots.
During the last decade, each state has seen overall progress in this sector.
I am aware that the handicraft sector in India faces a number of threats and challenges which hamper its growth.
The export of handicrafts, in addition, has also had to face a slowdown after the 2008 economic crisis.
Yet, we have many good reasons to focus on this sector, stimulate it and give it a boost.
Fortunately, due to the policy initiatives of Government of India and various state governments, there has been a growth of approximately 20% in the export of Indian handicrafts.
A good sign is that many artisans who had left the sector have begun to revert.
It is, however, necessary for Government to be vigilant and stay tuned to the demand in the existing markets in the developed countries as well as in emerging markets in Latin America, North America and Europe.
I am happy that the Government of Haryana, in collaboration with several Union Ministries has, year after year, has institutionalised this yearly event.
I congratulate Government of Haryana and particularly tourism department of Haryana for organizing this event.
I would like to also compliment and congratulate the Government of Karnataka for displaying their distinctive cultural and archaeological heritage in such an aesthetic manner.
I, personally, enjoyed seeing the replicas of the magnificent gates of the Mysore Palace and have always admired the unique architectural styles of Belur, Hampi, the Jain Basadis and Bijapur.
Other State exhibits, Apna Ghar, and stalls of foreign participants including the SAARC countries and the African Pavilion will, no doubt, enthuse the visitors.
I do hope that the success of this event will motivate other States of India to organise similar melas.
I am sure that in the years to come the Surajkund Crafts Mela will continue to attract the best of our proud artisans.
With these words, I wish the 27th Surajkund International Crafts Mela every success.
I am glad to be a part of this august gathering comprising policy makers, representatives from the agrochemical industry, and eminent intellectuals and scientists.
In the context of pursuing inclusivity in economic growth, it is of primary essence to achieve the inter-dependent objectives of poverty alleviation, mitigation of food inadequacy, creation of rural employment and growth in rural incomes.
The subject matter of this Conference is therefore apt and I applaud the efforts of the organizers to bring an issue of topical importance to the forefront of national policy discourse.
Unless the health of our population is secured, we may not be able to realize the progress that we have envisaged for our nation.
With a growing population, the challenge before us is not only to ensure that the indicators of food security do not deteriorate, but instead show improvement.
Food production therefore deserves high priority in our national policy formulation.
Food deprivation cannot be allowed to continue.
Steps are required to secure for the poor and the needy greater access to food.
Our democracy is committed to ensuring for its citizens social, economic and political justice.
We have relied on a rights-based method and empowered our citizens with legal entitlements.
The landmark Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act of 2005 is one such example.
I am hopeful of the proposed legislation for provision of food security to our people becoming a reality very soon.
From about 23 per cent during the Ninth Five Year Plan period, the share of this sector has come down to about 15 per cent during the Eleventh Plan period.
Yet, in a country with one-third of its rural population below poverty line, the potential of the agriculture sector for rural rejuvenation cannot be undermined.
Some studies have indicated that a one percentage growth in agriculture sector is two to three times more effective in reducing poverty than a one percentage growth in other sectors.
The growth of the Agriculture and Allied Sectors decreased from 7.0 per cent in 2010-11 to 2.8 per cent in 2011-12, and to 2.1 per cent in the first half of the current financial year.
This deceleration is perhaps reflective of the challenging economic scenario, but I am confident of this situation being reversed quickly.
Agriculture ought to be an effective agent of change in rural India.
We have envisaged the agriculture sector to grow at 4 per cent per annum during the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
The agricultural growth in the Eleventh Plan period was mainly due to improved agricultural prices.
As demand for major crops are projected to slow down during the Twelfth Plan period, we will have to rely primarily on productivity gains to attain the targeted growth.
At the same time, rice production in agriculturally advanced areas of North-Western India is becoming unsustainable due to over exploitation of natural resources like land and water.
We have devised a strategy for increasing production and productivity in the Eastern region to ensure food security, while reducing pressure on North-Western region.
To achieve this objective, a four-pronged strategy was delineated as part of the Union Budget for 2010-11 covering agricultural production, reduction in wastage, credit support and thrust to the food processing sector in order to spur inclusive growth, enhance rural incomes and sustain food security.
I am told that the sustained efforts of the past three years have produced very encouraging outcomes, in terms of significant increase in the share of the Eastern region in the total rice production in the country.
Of the total rice production of 104 million tonnes in the country in 2011-12, a record production of 55 million tonnes of rice was contributed by the Eastern region.
I am told that this Committee has decided to focus on procurement of rice during 2012-13, besides ensuring timely availability of credit facilities to poor farmers.
It is gratifying to know that an Apex Committee on Agriculture for Eastern India has been constituted under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister to provide impetus to the ongoing efforts for agriculture development in that region.
I am confident that this would provide the line departments such as power, irrigation, finance, fertilizers, marketing and cooperatives a forum to converge their activities in identified clusters so as to achieve integrated delivery of services to the farmers.
We should place greater emphasis on productivity-driving measures such as diversification of crops, improvement in seed replacement rate, adoption of high yielding hybrid seeds, and improvement in water management practices.
India is one of the leaders of the information and communication technology revolution.
We must resort to greater use of satellite communication for weather forecasting and to information technology for its effective dissemination to the farming community.
In addition to these steps for prevention of crop failure, we must strengthen mechanisms such as agricultural insurance to manage the risk of crop failure due to natural calamities, pests and diseases.
The Green Revolution in the Sixties brought about a considerable rise in the food production but the disproportionate use of chemical fertilizers eventually led to a decline in food grain productivity.
The need for balanced use of fertilizers and pesticides should be propagated amongst our farming community through agriculture education and extension programmes.
The first Green revolution was restricted in terms of geography.
We should usher in a second Green revolution that is widespread and which touches all arable land in the country.
The total food grain production of the country increased by 12 million tonnes in 2011-12, from 245 million tonnes in the previous year.
In 2012-13, the food grain production in the Kharif season is estimated at 117 million tonnes, which is lower than the 130 million tonnes of food grain production in Kharif season in the previous year.
In the context of the current production levels, doubling food production in the next five years will be a great challenge and test of our capacity to successfully employ all possible growth-inducing measures.
Quantum jump in food production will have several positive spinoffs.
It will drive investment in infrastructure for storage, processing, transportation and packaging.
It will also boost the prospects of the agro-processing industry.
It will create jobs in the rural sector.
Better livelihood opportunities in rural areas will reduce the pressure of migration on urban centers.
Growth in food production will also help in conservation of natural resources.
With the technologies at our disposal, it will be possible to utilize farm waste from increased food production as feed for livestock and aquaculture.
This will reduce pressure on forest lands which are currently used as pastures for grazing animals.
It will be possible to arrive at ways and means of achieving this feat only through extensive consultations.
I congratulate the Ministry of Agriculture and CCFI for providing a platform to facilitate a greater understanding of this issue by all stakeholders concerned.
I am hopeful of meaningful answers emanating from this deliberation.
On the eve of our 64th Republic Day, I extend warm greetings to all of you in India and abroad.
I convey my special greetings to members of our armed forces, paramilitary forces and internal security forces.
This is neither accidental nor providential; history shifts its pace when touched by vision.
The great dream of raising a new India from the ashes of colonialism reached a historic denouement in 1947; more important, independence became a turning point for an equally dramatic narrative, nation-building.
The foundations were laid through our Constitution, adopted on 26 January 1950, which we celebrate each year as Republic Day.
Its driving principle was a compact between state and citizen, a powerful public-private partnership nourished by justice, liberty and equality.
India did not win freedom from the British in order to deny freedom to Indians.
The Constitution represented a second liberation, this time from the stranglehold of traditional inequity in gender, caste, community, along with other fetters that had chained us for too long.
Change across the knotted weaves of the social fabric remains a work in progress, impelled by periodic reform in law and the momentum of popular will.
Our economic growth rate has more than tripled.
The literacy rate has increased by over four times.
After having attained self sufficiency, now we are net exporters of food-grain.
Significant reduction in the incidence of poverty has been achieved.
Among our other major achievements is the drive towards gender equality.
The difficulties that accompanied the first quantum leap, the Hindu code bill, enacted in 1955 tell their own story.
It needed the unflinching commitment of leaders like Jawaharlal Nehru and Babasaheb Ambedkar to push through this remarkable legislation.
Jawaharlal Nehru would later describe this as perhaps the most important achievement of his life.
The time has now come to ensure gender equality for every Indian woman.
We can neither evade nor abandon this national commitment, for the price of neglect will be high.
Vested interests do not surrender easily.
The civil society and the government must work together to fulfill this national goal.
Fellow Citizens:
The brutal rape and murder of a young woman, a woman who was symbol of all that new India strives to be, has left our hearts empty and our minds in turmoil.
We lost more than a valuable life; we lost a dream.
If today young Indians feel outraged, can we blame our youth?
But there is also a higher law.
The sanctity of a woman is a directive principle of that larger edifice called Indian civilization.
The Vedas say that there is more than one kind of mother: birth mother, a guru's wife, a king's wife, a priest's wife, she who nurses us, and our motherland.
Mother is our protection from evil and oppression, our symbol of life and prosperity.
When we brutalise a woman, we wound the soul of our civilization.
Nothing should be allowed to spur cynicism, as cynicism is blind to morality.
We must look deep into our conscience and find out where we have faltered.
The solutions to problems have to be found through discussion and conciliation of views.
People must believe that governance is an instrument for good and for that, we must ensure good governance.
Fellow Citizens:
The future belongs to them.
They are today troubled by a range of existential doubts.
Does the system offer due reward for merit?
Have the powerful lost their Dharma in pursuit of greed?
Has corruption overtaken morality in public life?
Does our legislature reflect emerging India or does it need radical reforms?
These doubts have to be set at rest.
Elected representatives must win back the confidence of the people.
The anxiety and restlessness of youth has to be channelized towards change with speed, dignity and order.
They must have jobs capable of serving their own as well as the nation's ambitions.
The resource base of the Union government today is an ocean compared to that drop.
But we must ensure that the fruits of economic growth do not become the monopoly of the privileged at the peak of a pyramid.
The primary purpose of wealth creation must be to drive out the evil of hunger, deprivation and marginal subsistence from the base of our expanding population.
Fellow Citizens:
As we move ahead on the path of economic reforms, we must remain alive to the persisting problems of market-dependent economies.
Many rich nations are now trapped by a culture of entitlement without social obligations; we must avoid this trap.
The results of our policies should be seen in our villages, farms and factories, schools and hospitals.
Figures mean nothing to those who do not benefit from them.
Neighbours may have disagreements; tension can be a subtext of frontiers.
But sponsorship of terrorism through non-state actors is a matter of deep concern to the entire nation.
We believe in peace on the border and are always ready to offer a hand in the hope of friendship.
But this hand should not be taken for granted.
Fellow Citizens:
Each challenge becomes an opportunity to strengthen our resolve to achieve unprecedented economic growth and social stability.
Such resolve must be nourished by an avalanche of investment, particularly in better and greater education.
Education is the ladder that can help those at the bottom to rise to the pinnacles of professional and social status.
Education is the mantra that can transform our economic fortunes and eliminate the gaps that have made our society unequal.
So far education has not reached, to the extent desired, to those most in need of this ladder.
India can double its growth rate by turning today's disadvantaged into multiple engines of economic development.
If India has changed more in six decades than six previous centuries, then I promise you that it will change more in the next ten years than in the previous sixty.
India's enduring vitality is at work.
In word wisdom...
In deed courage...
In life service...
Your Majesty,
Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck, King of Bhutan
Your Majesty,
Ashi Jetsun Pema Wangchuck, Queen of Bhutan,
Prime Minister, Dr Manmohan Singh,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
On behalf of the Government and the people of India, it is my privilege to extend to Your Majesties and to your distinguished delegation a very warm welcome.
We are honoured that you will grace our celebrations on the occasion of India's 64th Republic Day.
It is indeed a great pleasure to receive you here this evening.
The substantial content and outcome of that visit have been regarded by both our Governments as yet another manifestation of the unique nature of the India-Bhutan relationship.
Your Majesty, Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck, the Government and the people of India hold you in high esteem and admiration.
On the completion of five years of Democratic Constitutional Monarchy in Bhutan, please accept, Your Majesty, our felicitations.
You have guided your people through a period of political transition with prudence and sagacity.
It is indeed a tribute to Your Majesty's leadership that Bhutan has harmoniously embraced and adopted democracy and, in a short time, taken long strides towards progress and prosperity.
Under your Government, Bhutan's GDP has grown at over 8% annually; you have brought down unemployment to only 2% and have achieved close to universal primary school enrolment, access to healthcare, safe drinking water, electricity and other such facilities for your happy people.
Telecommunication services have reached all corners of your country and a network of motorable roads has been created.
We share your satisfaction at the unanimous recognition of the importance of happiness in the United Nations General Assembly and the declaration of 20th March as the International Day of Happiness.
We rejoice in the success of this and other initiatives taken by Your Majesty's Government.
Your Majesty, India deeply values and attaches the highest importance to our traditional ties of close friendship with Bhutan, based on utmost sensitivity and respect for each other's vital interests and shared perspectives on strategic issues.
Both our Governments are agreed that our friendship has been constant because of the pillars of trust and understanding on which it is founded.
We should ensure that these pillars remain strong and unshakable.
The Government and the people of India consider it a privilege to contribute, sharing our modest resources, to the realization of the Bhutanese way of socio-economic development.
We should endeavour to strengthen our mechanisms for mutual consultation and co-operation especially in areas of shared interest and common concern.
Government of India remains committed to further expanding and deepening our multi-faceted, mutually beneficial partnership - in accordance with the hopes and aspirations of the people of our two countries.
As articulated by our first Prime Minister, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, who laid the foundation of our relationship, India's wish is that Bhutan should remain an independent country choosing its own way of life and taking the path of progress according to its will.
Your Majesty, the well-being, stability and progress of Bhutan are central to our vision for the future.
It is our firm belief that our exceptionally close and friendly ties will further strengthen in the coming years.
We wish you a long and fruitful reign and the very best of success in your endeavours for the people of Bhutan.
As Bhutan prepares for its second democratic elections in a few months, the people of India send their good wishes to the people of Bhutan and wish for everlasting peace, prosperity and happiness in the Kingdom of Bhutan, the land blessed by Guru Padmsambhava.
- to the health and happiness of Their Majesties the King and Queen of Bhutan;
- to the well-being and prosperity of the people of Bhutan; and
- to abiding friendship and co-operation between India and Bhutan.
It gives me great pleasure to be in Kolkata today for the closing ceremony of the Sesquicentennial Celebrations of the High Court of Calcutta.
The three Presidency High Courts including the High Court at Calcutta were brought into existence by Royal Charter, a Letters Patent, issued by the Queen under her sign manual and privy seal, as authorized by the High Courts Act, 1861, a colonial legislation.
The Letters Patent gave the High Courts including the High Court at Calcutta the same power as the High Court in England had, at that time.
It therefore could do equity and issue writs including those that we have become familiar with under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
There was only one limitation before 1950, that they could not extend to revenue matters.
The High Court could even issue mandatory orders and preventive injunctions as specific reliefs in properly constituted suits against the government.
It could and often did adjudicate between man and man and on concepts and on social ills that have had a wide-ranging impact.
Since independence and the coming into force of the Constitution of India, the Calcutta High Court has strived to secure for our citizens justice-social, economic and political-as enjoined in the preamble to our Constitution.
The High Court, over the years, has earned fame as an institution of high standards with strong traditions and ideals.
Land mark decisions of this Court have contributed greatly to the strengthening of the legal and constitutional framework of our country.
Illustrious lawyers and Judges of this Court have contributed immensely to nation building and advancement of social justice.
In general, the Indian judiciary has played a glorious role in national development and in upholding the ideals of the Indian Constitution.
As per the Indian Constitution, the State is enjoined with a duty to secure to its citizens a social order, in which the legal system of the nation promotes justice on the basis of equal opportunity.
The State is also required to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reasons of caste, creed, sex or by reasons of economic or other disabilities.
Currently, we are a country with a population of nearly 1.2 billion.
For a country of such a large population, the judicial institutions have the unenviable task of delivering timely, affordable and quality justice to all its citizens, regardless of whether they approach the courts for enforcing their civil rights or proving their innocence against charges of criminal misconduct.
It has to ensure that those who are on the wrong side of the law are dealt with swiftly and effectively to maintain the social order if the confidence and faith of the people of India in the judiciary has to be maintained.
I have no hesitation in stating today that the Indian judiciary has truly lived up to the faith and confidence of the people by upholding the Rule of Law and enforcing the right to personal liberty and freedom at any cost.
The judiciary deserves unequivocal recognition for this stellar achievement.
The independence of the Judiciary is the cornerstone of our democracy.
Everything necessary needs to be done to preserve and protect the independence of our judiciary.
While the exercise of powers of the legislature and executive are subject to judicial review, the only check on the judiciary's exercise of powers is the self-imposed discipline and self-restraint.
Legislation which carefully balances the independence of the judiciary with the need to protect and preserve its credibility is a useful complement to the judiciary's own efforts.
We must never forget that it is the Constitution which is supreme and not any one of its creations - the legislature, the executive or the judiciary.
Our judges, through innovation and judicial activism have contributed enormously to expanding the frontiers of justice and providing access to the poorest of the poor of our country.
At the same time, the judiciary, as an important pillar of democracy, must also keep reinventing itself through a process of introspection and self-correction.
In a parliamentary democracy, the greatest challenge to good governance is to bridge the gap between the expectations of the people and the effectiveness of the delivery mechanisms.
Though Indian judiciary has preserved its pre-eminent place in Indian democracy, one area where it has lagged behind is in not being able to fully meet the aspirations of the people and provide quick, speedy and accessible justice to those who knock at its doors.
Much has been done but that is not enough.
Our courts need to be urgently strengthened with additional resources.
The filling of vacancies in courts across the country must be taken up as a priority by all concerned.
The process of selection and appointment of judges should conform to the highest of standards and should be based on well established and transparent principles.
The judicial system in our country should not only be accessible but also affordable.
In order to address time consuming and expensive litigation, alternative dispute resolution mechanisms such as mediation and arbitration should be encouraged.
Further, there must be adequate provision for free legal aid.
Greater efforts are also needed to spread legal literacy across the nation and improve the quality of legal education.
The Government in partnership with the judiciary is undertaking a number of initiatives for speedy delivery of justice.
Under the eCourts Mission Mode Project more than 11,000 district/subordinate Courts have been computerized already.
The Government hopes to reach the target of 14,000 ICT enabled Courts by March 2014.
After the Project is complete, case management in the Courts would become automated.
The Courts will be in a position to provide electronically more than forty services to litigants and other stakeholders.
As a result, Courts will be in a position to dispense justice faster and quicker.
ICT enabled Courts will ultimately have to move to the next level and become full-fledged eCourts.
As Courts of tomorrow, eCourts will have connectivity across police stations, prisons, forensic laboratories, hospitals and will record evidence online.
The filing of cases will be online and so will be the payment of fees.
The eCourt records will be all digitalized and judgments of the Courts will become available to the public on a website.
Another important judicial reform which is under way and being pursued together with judiciary is with regard to court procedures and court processes for speedy disposal of cases.
The Supreme Court of India has recently notified a National Court Management System for addressing the issues of case management and court management, for setting up measurable standards for the performance of the Courts and for laying down a National System for Judiciary Statistics in the country.
All this will accelerate the speed of justice delivery and once in place, will facilitate the establishment of a National Arrears Grid (NAG).
The NAG will in turn be a great tool for monitoring online pendency in each Court and for speedier disposal of old pending cases.
There are several other initiatives which are also under way to address the problem of pendency and improve the quality of justice.
A Sub-Group under the Chairmanship of Law Commission has been set up for taking a closer look at reforms in Criminal Justice System.
The National Mission for Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms, which has been set up by the Government in 2011, has already initiated a series of measures for fulfillment of the twin objective of increasing access to justice by reducing delays and arrears in the system for enhancing accountability through structural changes and by setting performance standards and capacities.
The Mission will also be actively pursuing the measures listed in the Vision Statement 2009, which has the acceptance of the judiciary.
I am certain that all these measures which are in the pipeline or are at different stages of implementation, will improve the credibility of the justice system and will bring about greater speed and transparency in dispensation of justice to the people of the country.
The High Court at Kolkata today has 41 judges, against the sanctioned strength of 58 judges.
There are 3.47 lakh cases pending in the Calcutta High Court as of 31st December 2011; more than 3 lakh of them being civil cases.
The pendency in the subordinate courts under the Calcutta High Court is an estimated 26 lakh and more than 21 lakh of them are criminal cases.
There is a need to speed up disposal of cases, as justice delayed is justice denied.
I am sure the Government of India and the State Government of West Bengal will extend all possible support to the Calcutta High Court in its endeavour to reduce this mountain of pendency.
I am also certain that both Governments are committed to making sure funds will not be a constraint in implementing initiatives to secure greater access to justice for our citizens.
The Government, judiciary and lawyers must work hand in hand to make our Constitution a living reality for the common man.
I am certain that the Calcutta High Court will continue to uphold its glorious heritage of 150 years.
It will enhance its contributions to the development of law, justice and jurisprudence.
It will at the same time ensure that administration of justice continues to be carried on with dedication and commitment to the common man.
I am very happy to be here with you on the occasion of the 15th Annual Convocation of the Bengal Engineering and Science University, Shibpur.
This University has come a long way since it was established, in 1856, with ten students and three faculty members as the Calcutta Engineering College.
Over the last 157 years, the University has evolved into a leading Institution whose alumni have proven themselves in different fields in India and abroad, bringing laurels not only to themselves but also to this institution.
I had noted then the progress made by this University in education and research, particularly, in the areas of green energy, medical sciences and water technology.
It is commendable that the University has now taken a lead in initiating undergraduate and postgraduate programmes in strategic areas like Aerospace Technology, Remote Sensing and Material Science & Technology.
You have equally focused on providing your students the infrastructure and facilities required for excellence and research in these key areas.
Your work of exploration and discovery in these fields is of great importance for developing advanced technology in our country to meet the priority needs of our people.
It is a well earned honour which should motivate all of you to excel in both academics and research.
Quite often, I have observed that there is a deficiency of research manpower in strategic areas like space technology, atomic energy, defence, as well as in basic engineering research in medical technology, and environmental science & technology.
I would stress that BESU, Shibpur which had once contributed significantly to the development of IIT system in India should now assume the responsibility of ensuring continuous revitalisation of its various Departments and Centres through research and innovation.
The Ph.D. programme of this University, I understand, has had a fresh enrolment of 235 candidates in 2012.
The number of sponsored projects have also multiplied manifold during the last three years and have benefited from increased funding.
I am particularly glad that the subjects of research include safe water and sanitation, development of semi-conductor nano materials, preparation of a Ganga-basin environmental management plan, development of a smart prognostic system of an early indication of cardiac disease.
I would like to remind you, as you break the frontiers of science and discover new technology, your efforts would be truly valuable if they bring efficiency to our industry, comfort in the daily lives of our people and wipe the tears of the most challenged of our countrymen.
It is always a pleasure to be among young people who are ready to step into their most creative years.
Your energy, your determination and your aspirations at this stage must be channelised to address the problems and challenges that our nation is facing in a result oriented manner.
I take this opportunity to call upon you all to be proactive in building our society but without forgetting our heritage and tradition of tolerance, mutual respect and an inclusive approach in achieving our developmental goals.
I take this opportunity to pay tribute to their legacy and hope that their efforts, achievements and contribution to humanity will inspire you, also, to aspire towards the highest goals.
I congratulate the Chancellor, Vice Chancellor, faculty members of the BESU University and wish them continued success in developing this University as an institution of excellence.
I am happy to be here today for the inauguration of the 28th Congress of the Asia Pacific Academy of Ophthalmology (APAO).
I thank the Academy and the All India Ophthalmological Society (AIOS) for having invited me to share my views with this galaxy of ophthalmologists who have assembled here from across the world.
This Congress is being held in India for the second time, after a gap of nearly 28 years.
That it is being held in India, is the result of the committed effort of the AIOS which has been collaborating closely with the APIO.
I congratulate them for this effort.
Ophthalmologists occupy a special status and importance in society.
You do so by being the doctors of eyes, the critical human organ necessary for the conduct of human affairs and pursuit of quality life.
Recognizing this importance, India, as many of you may already know, has been one of the earliest contributors to its science.
Sushruta, the father of Indian surgery, who wrote the Sushruta Samhita or compilation of treatments, in 600 BC, had described 76 ocular diseases, including 51 surgical, as well as several ophthalmological surgical instruments and techniques.
The care for the eye has received focused attention since the beginning of recorded human history because of the debilitating impact blindness can have on individuals, the families to which they belong, their economic well-being, the society and the prosperity of nations.
It also has very strong linkages with the incidence of poverty, particularly in less developed countries.
The World Health Organisation (WHO) in the Vision 2020 document, had by extrapolating the global data of 1975, estimated that in 1996 there would have been 45 million blind people and 135 million with low vision.
The data was further extrapolated and it is now estimated that by 2020, there would be 76 million blind people indicating that visual impairment would double in the period 1990-2020.
It has been established that the vast majority of those who are visually impaired reside in developing countries.
Poverty predisposes an individual to blindness and it increases the economic burden by curtailing employment opportunities and diversion of resources for its treatment.
Empirical studies show that low incomes not only contribute to higher incidence of blindness but 64% of the disabled slip into to poverty after the onset of visual impairment.
Even households that do not suffer impoverishment are three times likely to slip into poverty in the first year of the onset of the impairment in comparison to the households that are not affected.
The families affected by the disability have a lower probability of escaping the trap of poverty on account of increased expenditure for medical treatment.
Thus, while poverty causes disability, disability too may cause poverty.
Consequently, the economic impact on the individuals, or their families and the country as a whole is substantial.
Socially, the visually impaired suffer many handicaps.
It has been reported that more than 50% of the blind people in impoverished countries felt that their social standing and decision making capabilities had diminished because of the impairment.
The situation is worse when it comes to women as almost 80% of them have reported loss of authority within the family because of the impairment.
The impact of blindness is more debilitating on account of its direct and indirect impact on children.
Though figures vary, it has been estimated that there are around 1.4 million blind children in the world and 1 million of them live in Asia and Africa.
What is startling is that 60% of the children die in the first year of blindness.
It is another sad reality that every minute a child goes blind in the world.
Besides, in developing countries, even when adults are sightless, children are often responsible for leading the adults.
Consequently, such children find it difficult to attend school thereby restricting their prospects for education employment opportunities.
What is particularly disquieting is the conclusion of a University of California, San Francisco, study that about 85% of all visual impairment and 75% of blindness in the world could have been either prevented or cured.
As stated in the Vision 2020 document of WHO, the problem of blindness can only be combated through increased political commitment, professional commitment, provision of high quality eye care, increasing public awareness and support of non-governmental organizations and private sector.
Individually and collectively, they have promoted better practice, and research and manpower development of ophthalmic sciences in India.
Several programmes for controlling blindness have been launched in India like the National Programme for Control of Blindness.
These programmes have yielded appreciable results.
But, government alone would not be able to combat blindness as effectively as collaborative ventures or the initiatives the two can together forge.
Private sector companies and government institutions should, therefore, join hands to fight blindness and visual impairment.
The private sector companies should not consider this a burden but as a way of discharging their social obligations.
The private sector would also help in increasing their sales and earnings through reduction in the incidence of blindness and poverty and the resulting increase in the prosperity in the society.
The need for collaborative initiatives is important as even comparatively simple interventions at the appropriate time would help prevent blindness.
For instance, cataract can be treated by a relatively simple surgery.
In this effort, individual doctors also can contribute by sparing one or two days in a month for social service.
With the help of other voluntary organizations, medical teams could travel to the interiors of the country in mobile operation theatres.
If the local medical associations like the Indian Medical Association can take this initiative in collaboration with the non-governmental organizations in towns and districts, it would make a distinct difference.
You would agree that while we strive for personal excellence and well being, there can be no greater satisfaction than giving sight to the sightless.
This is especially true as only 25% of the blindness in the world and 15% of all visual impairment are considered unpreventable or incurable.
I would, therefore, urge you not to count your success in terms of the economic prosperity, but by the number of people who you can help prevent from becoming blind or by giving sight to those who live without it.
I would, therefore, request you to work through your professional organizations in each of the districts, towns and cities, to achieve this laudable goal.
I am confident that this Congress, which I am told is being attended by over 9000 delegates from all over the world, will find solutions for providing greater medical access to the needy.
I also hope that the technical sessions will provide the necessary platform for knowledge sharing and information dissemination.
I wish the 28th Congress all the success.
I congratulate ASSOCHAM for organizing this very timely Summit focusing on the need to scale up innovations in the field of healthcare.
A majority of Indian patients have late-stage incurable diseases (75% to 80%) when first diagnosed.
In recent years cancer killed approximately 5, 56,000 people in India.
This is predicted to rise by 2030, to nearly 1.5 million deaths annually.
The silver lining, however, is that the life expectancy is continuously on the rise since past several decades.
It currently stands at approximately 64 years and is expected to rise even more taking into account the better healthcare facilities that India hopes to deliver in the coming years.
World Health Organisation (WHO) data currently suggest that in India, only 35% people have access to essential medicines and Health care.
Therefore, innovative healthcare coverage that assures access to medicines and treatment at affordable prices is an urgent necessity.
Knowledge is the driver of today's world.
While we stand at the cusp of greatness in several fields on the global platform, our innovation in the field of healthcare and medical sciences is yet to scale the required heights.
India needs to leap to the frontiers of innovative solutions in health care, discovering new cures, harnessing existing and emerging technologies for affordable healthcare, using our abundant heritage of traditional medicines and exploring new paradigms for preventing disease and creating wellness.
Diffusion of innovations is a major challenge in all health care.
We should conceptualize these innovations and form a brotherhood to collectively analyze these innovations and scale them up so as to reach the un-reached.
Ensuring universal health care is a major concern of governments the world over and that is true for our country also.
The rapid growth of high end technologies for diagnosis and treatment, and the fact that people are living longer and are more likely to need health support when they age, has become a challenge.
This in turn presents opportunities for the medical community, insurers and other service providers.
Innovative technologies, processes and partnerships forged by the Indian government and private companies have already begun bridging the health care gap.
Advances are underway on several fronts, from expanding health insurance coverage for the poor and building hospitals in smaller towns, to using technology for safer drinking water and improving treatment outcomes.
We should take pride in the fact that heart surgeries in India cost less than a tenth of what they would in the United States.
But there is still no denying that the Healthcare delivery gap is huge in India.
It is estimated that 64% of the poorest population in India become indebted every year to pay for the medical care they need.
85% of the Indian workforce working in the informal sector do not have any kind of insurance and lack access to effective social protection schemes.
Newer technologies like Information and Communications Technology (ICT) can play a major role in improving health care delivery.
One solution is telemedicine - the remote diagnosis, monitoring and treatment of patients via videoconferencing or the Internet.
Provision of universal health care is a matter of faith for the Government.
We need to take health services closer to the homes of the families.
We need out of the box managerial and administrative reforms in the health departments at the state and central level.
We need to develop effective models of healthcare for the ever-increasing urban population and at the same time not ignore rural healthcare needs.
The foundation of India's national health system must be strong, sensitive and efficient.
The challenges that the Indian healthcare sector faces are substantial, but the opportunities equally compelling.
I am pleased to be here today for distributing the Krishi Karman Awards for the year 2011-12 to State Governments for exemplary performance in increasing food grain production.
It is heartening to note that the record production achieved in 2011-12 was substantially broad-based covering over 2/3rd of the total cropped area in 18 States of the country.
This is indeed a unique laudable achievement.
I congratulate the Union Agriculture Minister Shri Sharad Pawar for taking the initiative for setting up these Awards.
The achievement is all the more significant considering that a set of new States like Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Tamil Nadu, Nagaland and Manipur have been awarded this year.
Agriculture is a challenging sector which is critically dependent on climatic factors and availability of natural resources.
The challenge is accentuated by the continuously rising pressure of demand for food, fodder, fibre, fuel and fertilizer.
There is greater need today for achieving higher production in an environmentally sustainable manner.
Further, better and increased use of satellite communication for weather forecasting and effective information dissemination to the farming community would help in preventing crop failure.
All-round progress in agriculture and allied sectors is a sine qua non for holistic rural development in the country.
During my tenure as the Union Finance Minister, I had outlined a four-pronged strategy as part of the Union Budget for 2010-11 to propel growth in the agriculture sector.
The four components of the strategy comprised of extending the green revolution to the Eastern region of the country, reducing the significant wastage in storage as well as in the operations of the existing food supply chains, improving credit availability to the farmers and providing further impetus to the development of the food processing sector by making available state-of-the-art infrastructure.
These strategies have led to positive outcomes and we need to build-on these initiatives to induce further improvements in the agriculture sector.
We are all aware that a number of issues are confronting farmers especially when the communication revolution is integrating the world into a global village.
Economies are simultaneously becoming knowledge and capital intensive.
Our farmers have to quickly adapt in order to cope with the changing times.
They have to upscale from engaging in agriculture for subsistence to taking up agriculture as a commercial venture.
With a large number of small and marginal farmers who rank at the bottom of the prosperity pyramid, the task is enormous and would need adequate support from Government.
Government would simultaneously need to focus on creation of employment opportunities in other sectors to provide income diversification to rural families who today are dependent for their livelihood solely on unviable land holdings.
Economies of scale through aggregation of produce can be catalysed through creation of additional on-farm and non-farm employment opportunities in rural areas.
In this regard, it is the collective responsibility of different departments and Ministries in Government of India to work in unison and at a scale that creates the desired impact.
Agriculture also needs to be given priority access to power, credit, water and fertilizers.
It needs no reiteration that food and nutrition security is important for India considering the size of our population and the large number of undernourished and malnourished living in extreme poverty.
Increased food production would not only give a boost to our efforts for improving access to food for all but would also positively impact household level food availability.
I once again applaud the efforts of the Agriculture Ministry in instituting the Krishi Karman Awards and congratulate the State Governments for their dedicated, sincere and tireless efforts in achieving a record production of food grains.
I am confident that these initiatives will make all stakeholders work even more closely towards realising the twin objectives of higher agricultural productivity and more sustained and durable economic growth.
It gives me a great pleasure to be here with you today, on this auspicious day of Makar Sankranti, for the CII ITC Sustainability Awards 2012.
I am thankful to the organizers for providing me the opportunity to be a part of this august gathering comprising of the Captains of Indian Industry.
It is gratifying to note how the subject of sustainability is rapidly gathering momentum to get mainstream recognition.
The CII ITC Centre of Excellence for Sustainable Development has been at the forefront of creating awareness, promoting leadership and building capacity to enable several Indian businesses to pursue sustainability goals.
I congratulate the Centre and ITC for promoting this Award for the last seven years.
Other society based initiatives like e-Choupal, Social and Farm Forestry programme have resulted in significant generation of livelihood and natural capital.
India is today the third largest economy in the world on Purchasing Power Parity basis.
It is also the second fastest growing economy, with its growth rate second only to China.
Over the last few decades, our economy has shown a capacity to grow faster.
The average annual growth rate of 5.5 per cent during the Ninth Five Year Plan period increased to 7.7 per cent and 7.9 per cent during the Tenth and Eleventh Plan periods respectively.
In six out of the last nine years, the growth rate of our economy had exceeded 8 per cent.
Due to the slowdown in the global economy and other factors, the growth rate has declined, from 8.4 per cent in 2010-11 to 6.5 per cent in 2011-12, and further to 5.4 per cent in the first half of 2012-13.
On several occasions in the past, our economy has demonstrated its capacity to grow at a healthy rate despite disturbances in the global economy and external sector.
I hope that we would be successful in overcoming the challenge of reversing this short term deceleration and bring our economy back to the growth levels of 8 to 9 per cent per year.
The imperative to grow rapidly amidst difficult global circumstances is not the only challenge though.
In meeting these challenges, I am sure the Indian industry will prove to be more than able partners.
But the natural ecosystem and the people who make up the society are also vital for nation building.
While ensuring universal access to natural resources, we must also promote its efficient use.
Most economic activities depend on products and services provided by the ecosystem.
In order to sustain the pace of economic growth, businesses must be able to operate without compromising the future capacity of the ecosystem.
Our country is the fourth biggest consumer of energy in the world, after the USA, China and Russia.
Energy Intensity, a measure of energy efficiency of an economy that indicates the cost of converting energy into GDP, is higher for India than developed nations such as the UK, Germany, Japan and the USA.
Thus, the high economic growth rate of above 8 per cent per annum that we have envisaged for our country in the next five years could entail significant consumption of energy.
We must vigorously pursue policies that promote energy efficiency.
I expect the private sector to play a major role towards ushering an era of green energy and sustainability.
The economic prosperity that our country has experienced over the last few decades will mean nothing if, on account of poverty, a significant percentage of our population is not able to participate in its development.
A poverty ratio of around 30 per cent and illiteracy rate of 26 per cent in our country is simply not acceptable.
A decisive reduction in poverty will be possible only if there is an expansion in economic opportunities for all sections of the society.
Today, the notion that development encompasses more than just the single dimension of economic indicators, is gaining ground.
Historically as well as traditionally, businesses have considered financial gains as the measure of success.
We need to usher in a culture of social responsibility in the governance of Indian companies.
Indian business, by integrating social and environmental objectives in their operations, can make a positive contribution for the betterment of our society.
I am happy to note that our Industry is actively participating in several key areas of development in the country.
Several businesses are developing and implementing innovative solutions for energy access in rural areas.
I understand that the organizations being awarded today are actively engaged in working with the local communities, in providing agriculture education to farmers and technical education and skill development to the youth, in nurturing local businesses, in addressing issues such as water scarcity, and in spreading awareness on issues ranging from health to biodiversity conservation.
This Award function is an excellent platform to recognize the efforts of those corporate organizations which have moulded their business models to accommodate the parameters of sustainability.
I take this opportunity to commend both CII ITC Centre of Excellence for Sustainable Development and ITC for their relentless efforts and support for this novel initiative.
I congratulate all the winners, who have adopted a difficult path.
Let me assure you that the path you have chosen is also full of opportunity.
But to find those opportunities, you have to think, create, and deliver while taking care of our future generations.
Recognition helps to bring the issue of sustainability to the centre stage of our attention.
But what is necessary for our Industry is a belief within them that the compulsion of creating value for a business cannot be separated from our concern for society and environment.
I appeal to the Indian Industry to be part of this sustainability movement and participate in true nation-building.
The Seminar has been organized by the India International Law Foundation.
I congratulate the organisers for choosing this theme at a very appropriate time.
Let me begin by stating the universal rule that there is nothing constant in this world except change.
The only difference could be the speed at which the wheels of transformation may spin.
The idea of justice and the manner of its implementation are no exception to this universal rule.
Judicial reforms should, therefore, be at the centre stage in the fast transforming world in which we live.
It is imperative for enhancing the quality of justice that is at the core of human existence and welfare of any society.
It is simply the fundamental goal of all societies.
This is the reason why the human civilization has been locked in a constant struggle to achieve higher standards of fairness and equity.
The endeavour is timeless with societies borrowing new practices from each other achieving higher standards of justice and more commonality in laws and procedures in the process.
The ultimate goal of securing justice is the primary function of any judicial system.
To accomplish it, the existence of the rule of law is a priority, with the highest standards of transparency, and the deliverance of speedy justice at affordable costs, being the two legs that give life and soul to the precept.
Justice delivered with these goals can only live up to the highest standards of the ideal.
It would, therefore, be necessary to effect organizational and procedural changes in the judiciary from time-to-time to address the exigencies of time.
Yet the path to achieve it is varied and there is no consensus on the reforms that need to be embraced for it.
Different stakeholders may accord different priorities to the changes that need to be made.
In the ultimate analysis, however, the efficacy of the judicial system will depend on its capacity to deliver justice to all irrespective of their social or economic standing in the society.
In India, the judiciary has risen to this call departing from its traditional role of only settling disputes.
Consequently, the role and expectation from the judiciary have also changed to encompass justice in its wider term.
The assumption of this wider role has at times courted opposition for its deviation from the principles of the separation of powers.
Yet, some of the positive contributions that such activism have spawned are unquestionable.
The three organs should not step into or play the role that the constitution has not assigned them.
In India, justice is time consuming and expensive.
The large pendency of court cases is a cause for concern.
The total pendency in the Subordinate Courts and High Courts in the end of 2011 calendar year was over 3.1 crore cases.
The pendency in the end of 2012 calendar year in the Supreme Court was over 66 thousand cases.
Delay further adds to the costs.
Therefore, in many ways it tantamounts to denying justice and this is against the principle of equality that is the bedrock of democracy.
The Eighteenth Law Commission had made certain suggestions in this direction.
Steps to utilize full working hours of the court, more application of technology such that cases with similar points are clubbed for a combined decision, specifying a time limit for oral arguments, time limit for arriving at decision, and curtailing vacancies in the higher judiciary are some of the measures that are worth considering.
I have full faith in the genius of our Judiciary to find the way forward to effect reforms in the judicial system so as to sustain the faith of the common man in the justice delivery process.
We must engineer change to reduce the backlog of court cases and the experience of the legal luminaries from around the globe who are present here, may be able to share their experience on how they tackle such issues in their respective countries.
Worldwide experience reveals that important lessons can be gleaned from experiments conducted in different countries.
Additionally, there is a constant review of procedure and modification by way of Practice Directions and Practice Notes simplifying rules and forms.
In our country the Civil Procedure Code has all the ingredients necessary for an expeditious trial but the system requires a change in the mind set of the persons administering it.
They should have a commitment to speed and expedition.
Internationally there is complete recognition that management of litigation is a service and not a favour.
It is accepted that a litigant is entitled to the most appropriate and expeditious means of grievance redressal.
Today, we live in a world where the traditional notions of state boundaries are fast crumbling.
Technological advancements have created an interconnected world that has helped virtually unlimited exchange and transmission of information, the conduct of commercial transactions and social networking.
These developments have thrown up new challenges and opportunities for all the organs of the Government.
Globalization which is the engine of transformation, demands newer approaches.
Challenges spawned by globalization are many.
The difference between overseas and domestic interests is gradually fading, with foreign businesses gaining increasing access to local markets through liberalized trade opportunities, commerce and investment.
Complex litigations arising out of cross border trade and business transactions are increasingly being brought before courts in different countries.
Given the complexities of international law, including legal entitlements and implications of multilateral and bilateral treaties and agreements, there is perhaps a growing need to equip our respective national judiciaries to deal with the emerging international legal paradigm more effectively.
The legal frameworks across nation would have to change to facilitate smooth market transactions, rule of law, promote transparent and predictable outcomes and establish democratic governance structures through such transformation, security and human rights in societies.
In the light of the far-reaching changes gripping the world, there may be a need to broaden the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice at the Hague beyond those involving trade, business and commerce.
This is required in the context of disputes that arise on account of transnational commercial operations.
The need to allow legal professionals to practice without hindrance in all countries needs to be deliberated by the international legal fraternity.
The need also arises as small developing countries are inadequately equipped due to lack of expertise in the intricacies of world agreements and its dispute settlement mechanisms.
Judicial reform is a continuous process.
Through constant consultation among stakeholders consensus can be reached to engender changes.
I am hopeful that various aspects of judicial reforms would be discussed and argued vigorously, shall I say, as you legal luminaries virtually do for all your waking hours, though for this purpose, it may not be to win over the other.
I am sure that with your wisdom and experience, you will be able to address several concerns, paving the way for judicial reforms, which would benefit all.
It was due of the arduous efforts of all those associated with the task of conducting Census 2011 that yet another glorious chapter has been added to the annals of history of this institution.
India has a long and rich tradition of conducting Census taking.
The first synchronous census in India was conducted in the Year 1881.
The Census 2011 was the fifteenth Census in this series as reckoned from 1872 and the seventh since independence.
The successful conduct of Census without any break since 1872 makes the Indian census unique and unparalleled in the world.
Census taking in India is a very challenging task, in view of its multi-ethnic, multi-lingual and multi-cultural society.
The complexity of the exercise can be visualized from the fact that Census Schedules were canvassed in 16 languages and training given in 18 languages.
About 5.4 million Instruction manuals and 340 million Census Schedules were printed.
2.7 million enumerators and supervisors were engaged in the task of Census taking across 35 States, 640 districts, 5924 sub-districts, 7936 towns and 6.41 lakh villages!
The unique feature of Census 2011 is that Schedules for preparation of National Population Register (NPR) were also canvassed along with Houselisting Schedules.
I congratulate all my countrymen for having cooperated in Census taking.
Without their active and whole hearted co-operation it would have not been possible to complete this gigantic exercise in a short duration of 21 days.
I also congratulate the entire Census team for having completed the field work successfully within the stipulated time period and declared the provisional results in a record time of three weeks after completion of the field work.
India is emerging as a strong, self-reliant and modern nation.
The basic benchmark statistics on the state of human resources, demography, culture and economic structure thrown by Census 2011 would not only help planners, policy makers and other stakeholders in evaluating the success of on-going schemes but would also assist in formulating future developmental plans.
Census data are also widely used by national and international agencies, scholars, business persons, institutions and particularly the researchers.
Informed decision making has to be based on empirical data and census is the only source of data that provides information on various individual characteristics right up to village level for rural areas and ward level for urban areas.
I hope with the latest technology adopted by Census Organization for data dissemination, Census results would be accessible quickly to all the stakeholders in the remotest corner of the country.
I am given to understand that it is a tradition to recognize the outstanding work done by Census functionaries after every decennial census.
Census functionaries toil in the most difficult terrain and adverse conditions to make this mammoth exercise a grand success.
It gives me great pleasure to award Census Medals and Certificates of honour to Census functionaries in recognition of their outstanding zeal, high quality of work and devotion to duty.
I congratulate all the Census medal winners and wish them well for the future endeavours.
Jai Hind!
It was a widespread movement of multifaceted dimensions.
In this movement people of various persuasions, following different ideologies, presented a multipronged resistance to foreign rule.
Despite differences in their approaches and the methods of resistance to the foreign rule, they were all united in their desire to secure liberation for their motherland from yoke of colonial rule.
The Silk Letter Movement was one such effort from a group of revolutionaries.
This movement was a plan to mobilize the support of the governments of Afghanistan and Turkey in organizing a revolt within India to overthrow the British rule.
Obaidullah Sindhi and Maulana Mahmood Hasan were two important leaders of this movement.
In August 1916, some letters written on silk fell into British hands.
It is believed that the Silk Letters confiscated by British Government contained details of the Provisional Government of Azad Hind and its plans and a comprehensive scheme of forming an army and getting the support of the Turkish Government.
The stories of struggle need to be told and retold to a young generation born in a free India and enjoying the fruits of liberty.
I am happy that the Department of Posts has done its bit in this regard.
Over the years, it has issued postage stamps to acknowledge the contribution of various groups and movements which in their own ways contributed to the overall effort to liberate India.
The regular India Postage Stamps were introduced in October 1854 during the tenure of Governor General Lord Dalhousie.
These were red lithographed stamps of one anna and blue lithographed stamps of half anna, bearing the portrait of Queen Victoria.
This symbolism of British Monarchy came to an end with India gaining independence on 15th August, 1947.
I am told that since then the Department has issued more than three thousand stamps, many of them on great personalities and events which had contributed to the freedom struggle.
I am happy to be here amongst your midst to deliver the Valedictory Address of the Eleventh Pravasi Bharatiya Divas.
Today is an important day in the history of our country as this is the day when the father of our nation, Mahatma Gandhi, returned from South Africa 98 years ago.
It is befitting that January 9 has been chosen as the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas for today is a sort of homecoming for the Pravasis, symbolic though it may be.
It also gives the nation an occasion to renew and strengthen our bonds with the its diaspora, to celebrate and acknowledge the exemplary work done by you all in the various fields in your adopted country.
It is appropriate that this event is also being held in Kerala as the state has signified in many ways how the diaspora can contribute to the welfare of the state with which they are so closely linked.
Hundreds of thousands of workers and professionals from this state have migrated abroad, particularly to Gulf countries and their contribution to the welfare of the state has been remarkable.
They have also played a significant role in advancing the cause of the society by making it a state that has some of the best indices in the human development index.
Non Resident Keralites have been important agents in the State's promotion of sustainable development and socio-economic transformation.
Their contribution to the state by way of investments and remittances has been unparalleled.
The Indian diaspora has made our nation proud through the significant contributions that they have made to the development of the nations which they have chosen to make their homes.
It is a matter of pride for every Indian that today there are atleast 5 Heads of States or Heads of Governments and over 70 senior political leaders such as Deputy Heads of State, Speakers and Ministers in various countries who can trace their roots to India.
Ladies and Gentlemen, His Excellency Shri Rajkeswur Purryag, the President of Mauritius is one such eminent personality.
He epitomizes the spirit of leadership and public service that the people of Indian origin have so famously exhibited.
We are delighted and grateful that he is here with us today as a shining symbol of the Indian diaspora in the world and as the representative of the two-thirds of the people of Mauritius who are of Indian origin and Mauritius.
India's has a deep and enduring relationship with Mauritius.
India-Mauritius relations continue to grow on the bedrock of the historical and cultural links between the diaspora and India.
It is of particular delight that 12th March that is celebrated as the National Day of Mauritius is also the day that marked the beginning of the Dandi March of Mahatma Gandhi.
Mahatma Gandhi had too made a brief stopover in Mauritius in 1901 on his journey from South Africa to India.
Ladies and Gentlemen, The Indian diaspora has today grown to an estimated 25 million in as many as 110 nations.
It is a story of many geographies and many histories.
The vast and diverse overseas Indian community grew for a variety of reasons attributable mainly to mercantilism, colonialism and globalization.
The divergent patterns of settlement, the varying degrees of integration with their new homelands and the emergence of new identities and ethos make the Indian Diaspora unique in many respects.
It epitomises a saga of trials, tribulations and the eventual triumph of the will and hard work.
There is virtually no field of human endeavour that does not have your imprint.
The Indian diaspora is present in significant numbers in Canada, Malaysia, Singapore, Mauritius, South Africa, the USA, the UK, the Gulf nations and the countries in the West Indies.
I am told that in Bahrain, every established business organization in that country has an Indian employee in senior or middle management position.
Some of the brightest minds from the Indian diaspora have also been able to make their mark in the field of high technology.
Late Dr. Har Gobind Khorana was awarded the Nobel Prize for medicine in 1968.
While we celebrate the accomplishments of the diaspora, we should also not forget that many of them are struggling to establish themselves and many are facing hardships.
Some of them are working as labourers and domestic helps.
Many of them face difficulties on account of stringent labour laws, difficult working conditions, non-receipt of salaries, premature termination of contracts, change of contractual obligations amongst others.
Our missions abroad have been working hard to solve many of these problems.
The diaspora can also lend a helping hand in this regard.
I have been informed that diaspora organizations specially in the Gulf countries do provide such services.
Strengthening of such social service and philanthropic organizations may be something that the affluent sections of the diaspora could seriously look at.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I would also take this opportunity to remind you that India is today a land of immense opportunities.
It is the third largest economy in the world on the basis of Purchasing Power Parity.
It too is the second fastest growing economy after China.
In six out of the last nine years, our country has managed to grow at a rate above 8 per cent.
Due to the slowdown in the global economy and other factors, the growth rates have declined, from 8.4 per cent in 2010-11 to 6.5 per cent in 2011-12, and further to 5.4 per cent in the first half of 2012-13.
However, as India's economy has demonstrated its ability to weather external shocks in the past, I am hopeful that this resilient character of the economy will help to reverse this short-term deceleration and bring economic growth back to the level of 8 to 9 per cent.
You too can become partners in the progress of the nation.
For the accelerated growth of the economy, the investment level has to increase.
As you all know, the rapid economic growth in India after 2003-04 was accompanied by a rise in the investment rate, which has declined after reaching its highest level in 2007-08.
Thus, a revival of the high investment rate in the country is a must for the economy to regain its 8 per cent plus growth levels.
You all could help in the process by investing in Indian companies and establishing new ventures.
The yield of Indian equity markets is amongst the highest in the world and many of the most famous companies have established business here or seeking to do so.
As the Finance Minister, I had opened the Indian capital market for Qualified Foreign Investors (QFIs).
Initially, we permitted QFIs to invest in Indian Mutual Funds and on 1st January 2012, in a far-reaching decision, we opened the doors for them to directly invest in Indian equities.
Soon thereafter, the Corporate Bond market was opened to QFIs.
India has also set up a friendly regime to enable Indians abroad to remit money to the country.
NRIs can deposit money in the country under the Non Resident External Rupee account scheme, Non Resident Ordinary Rupee account scheme and Foreign Currency Non Resident account Banks scheme.
These schemes have been welcomed by the diaspora that they had deposited close to US$ 67 billion at the end of October 2012.
The net private transfers from abroad during the first half of 2012-13 was close to US$ 33 billion.
These figures bear testimony to the fact that Indians abroad find it both emotionally and financially fulfilling to invest in India especially in view of the sound economic fundamentals of the country.
I also wish to see the Indian diaspora as a stronger partner, not only in India's economic growth, but also in building India's knowledge society, while continuing to engage culturally and emotionally, and serving as the effective ambassadors that they have been for this country.
I am happy to note that we have created institutions that enable India to interact with its diaspora more comprehensively.
Since 2006, the Union Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has set up institutions like the Overseas Investment Facilitation Centre for enhancing economic engagement with the diaspora, and the India Development Foundation of overseas Indians to channel the philanthropic impulses of overseas Indians.
The Know India and Scholarship Programmes have been introduced to provide overseas youth of Indian origin exposure to the country's culture, heritage and economic growth.
Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) and Persons of Indian Origin (PIO) cards have been introduced to facilitate easy travel to India.
These are only some of the important measures introduced to strengthen the bonds with overseas Indians.
There is an important role that each one of you can play in India's journey to becoming a strong, just and equitable society and taking its rightful place in the comity of nations.
I am sure that the various seminars and sessions that you have attended over the last three days would prove useful in many ways.
Besides giving you more information on the opportunities that India offers you, they would have also given you an insight into the several initiatives that have been taken to ensure social development and inclusive growth in the country.
With the knowledge and experience you have gained as academics, scholars, scientists, technologists, professionals and businessmen, you can play a decisive role in the development of India.
I wish you success in all your endeavours and join in celebrating and acknowledging that we are proud of your achievements and the invaluable service that you have rendered India, the nation of your roots.
Your Excellency Rajkeswur Purryag, President of the Republic of Mauritius,
Mrs. Aneetah Purryag,
Distinguished Guests,
It gives me great pleasure to extend a warm welcome to you and your distinguished delegation on your first State Visit to India.
You are a long standing friend of India and a strong advocate of closer ties between India and Mauritius.
Excellency, our nations, bound by our historical ties share a unique warmth and friendship built on the foundation of close bonds between our peoples.
Present-day Mauritius is home to successful and progressive persons of Indian origin who have carved a niche for themselves in the country through their hard work and commitment to its progress.
Since the days of Mahatma Gandhi's deep interest in Mauritius and the active involvement of Manilal Doctor in advocating social and political change in Mauritius in the early 1900s, Mauritius has achieved much as an independent and progressive nation.
The father of modern Mauritius, Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, had laid the foundations for democracy and the prosperity that your people enjoy today.
India welcomes the socio-economic progress made by Mauritius in a short span of over four decades after its independence.
Despite the downturn that impacted the global economy, Mauritius has shown remarkable resilience and Mauritians have persevered to maintain their impressive economic growth and high standard of living.
The long-standing ties of co-operation between India and Mauritius have today evolved into a modern and vibrant partnership involving key sectors on both sides.
This has been facilitated by our regular dialogue and inter-Governmental initiatives operationalised through a framework of bilateral agreements, public and private sector joint ventures and robust people-to-people contacts.
We have a long history of co-operation in international fora.
On issues of primary importance to us - including the fight against terrorism and our rightful claim to a permanent seat at the UN Security Council, we appreciate the shared perception and support of Mauritius.
We look forward to working with you for the long term interests of both our countries - including on regional and global issues where we have similar concerns.
I also take this opportunity to emphasise that the safety and security of our respective peoples should remain a high priority in our bilateral agenda.
Peace and stability throughout the region of the Indian Ocean that washes our shores is an objective that we both share.
We face the common challenge of maritime piracy, that must be overcome by the collective efforts of all the littoral states that are affected.
We value the active support and involvement of the Government of Mauritius in the Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation.
Mauritius was the venue for the 6th Overseas Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention held recently.
I take this opportunity to thank your Government, and the people of Mauritius for welcoming this multi-dimensional event with enthusiasm.
They have been active participants in the events and initiatives involving the 27 million-strong Indian diaspora.
We are particularly honoured that you will be Chief Guest at this year's Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention in Kochi.
India's commitment to the progress and prosperity of Mauritius remains firm.
We have taken several decisions on bilateral assistance and the economic package that we have discussed during your visit will, no doubt, take us forward towards our common objectives.
- To the enduring tradition of close friendship and co-operation between India and Mauritius; and
- To the progress and prosperity of the friendly people of the Republic of Mauritius.
At the outset, I wish the participants to the Centenary session of Indian Science Congress and the people of the Nation, a purposeful and productive New Year.
The Prime Minister of India generally inaugurates the annual sessions of Indian Science Congress.
In the current year, the Association has elected the Prime Minister as its General President.
I congratulate Dr. Manmohan Singh for being elected as the General President of Indian Science Congress in this historic year.
It is a befitting honour.
I can from personal experience vouchsafe the abiding faith of Dr. Manmohan Singh on education, science and technology.
The good performance of science and technology sector in the recent years, I believe, owes greatly to the generous government support for S&T catalysed by the Prime Minister.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I am an alumnus of Calcutta University.
Naturally, I am delighted to participate in a function co-organized by Calcutta University.
As an alumnus, I fondly remember defining role of this university and Sir Asutosh Mukherjee in nurturing the Indian Science Congress in the early years.
Kolkata has remained historically a city of culture, of knowledge.
All Nobel Prizes awarded for work from India are somehow linked to the city of Kolkata.
Sir Ronald Ross carried out his pioneering research on Malaria in this city for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1902.
The legendry Rabindranath Tagore and Mother Teresa were also awarded Noble Prizes for their work carried out in Kolkata.
These organizations gave rise to celebrated luminaries in science who promoted a scientific culture.
Sir JC Bose, Prof. Satyendra Nath Bose, PC Ray, Meghnad Saha and many others who built the edifice of modern science in the country.
Sir JC Bose is hailed as the first of modern scientists of this country.
His original contributions to the invention of radio are well known.
The recent discovery of Higgs-boson particle highlights the epoch making contributions of Prof. Satyendra Nath Bose to particle physics.
I do hope that the modern scientists of this city would emulate the examples of these leaders of science of the past.
ISCA presented me a compilation of all the addresses of General Presidents of the Association as well as the inaugural addresses delivered over the years.
These make fascinating reading.
In a sense, these capture the history of Indian science as it evolved over the past 100 years.
In the year 1957, I was a student at Calcutta University.
In that year, the Prime Minister of India Pandit Nehru was the Chief Guest.
The Chief Minister of Bengal, the visionary Prof BC Roy was the President of the Science Congress.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Science has to be closely linked to a culture within the society which is built on scientific knowledge.
Scientific culture demands that choices and decisions are made by individuals, society and the nation on the basis of scientific logic.
Indian economy has been following a new paradigm of development; faster, sustainable and inclusive growth with equity.
It is a new concept because it combines the faster growth with objectives of inclusiveness and sustainability.
How to harness the forces of science, technology and innovation to achieve this end calls for deep deliberation.
I am sure, you will discuss this in all its aspects and implications with the seriousness that it demands.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Science is one of the creative endeavours of human mind.
Prepared and creative minds are required to observe the revelations of Nature.
Science seeks universal and fundamental truth.
Culture of Excellence is the second nature of creative scientists.
Eminent scientists of the world have always been concerned as to how their understanding of natural phenomena could be applied to solve social problems of the future.
Even now it is an active area of research pursuit globally.
His disciple Prof. Satyendra Nath Bose was a powerful communicator and an inspired teacher.
He motivated generation of people to move towards scientific endeavour.
Public and political understanding of science is crucial.
For that, I would like to urge upon you all to apply modern tools for communicating science in a manner that can be understood by the common man.
This understanding would contribute to the creation of a science culture in the Indian society.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The prime concern of any government in a country is enhancing the well being of its people.
Technology has the power of changing the lives of the people by creating physical well being.
Countries have undergone transformational changes, all in one generation, from a relatively weak to an emerging economy.
In this transformational change, technology-led economic growth has played a key role.
While technology can be considered a logical extension of knowledge gained from science, it is much more than mere application of science.
Technology is contextual.
There is a economic value to technology.
We all are a witness to the transformational changes being brought about by mobile telephony and internet.
The number of mobile phone users in India was around 19 crore in October 2012 which is the second highest in the world after China.
The mobile phone density of 74.21 per cent of India compares favourably with the other top ranking countries.
India ranks third after China and USA in terms of number of internet users.
However, the penetration of internet use as the percentage of the population is only 11.4 indicating the huge potential for future growth.
Another transformational application of technology is Aadhaar project which focuses on electronic transfer of benefits directly to the beneficiaries of various social sector schemes.
I understand the roll out of Aadhaar enabled service delivery has already started in twenty districts.
In the Budget 2012-13, a target for covering fifty districts has been set which, I am sure, will be met.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is essential to innovate if we have to compete in a globalised economy.
India has declared 2010-20 as the decade of innovation.
The announcement of Science, Technology and Innovation Policy today lays the roadmap for the development of an eco system for innovations and for encouraging, recognizing and rewarding the innovators in the society, especially the grass root innovators who through their genius are adding value to the processes which directly impact the local population.
The new STI policy has also addressed the issue of right-sizing our research and development system.
Balanced economic growth especially in emerging economies like India is of paramount importance.
Productive engagement of our youth in agriculture, manufacturing and value based services holds the key for a balanced growth of the country.
The new STI Policy, I am confident, will pave the technology-led path for change ensuring prosperity with peace and inclusiveness.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We need an educational system which lays importance on development of a scientific culture within the society.
Mere economic growth without the attendant knowledge capacity to manage the dimensions of change would neither suffice nor be appropriate.
Our ancient universities, whether these be Nalanda or Taxila, focused on value based holistic education.
Innovation is a modern means of converting knowledge into social value and wealth.
Indian philosophy, seeks to balance the pursuit of wealth and material success with the mastery of the self and the quest of inner happiness.
The deeply introspective, yet practical, wisdom of Indian philosophy must find resonance in the metaphor of competition and conquest popularized in the modern world.
I would like to call upon the scientific community to work for the promotion of a scientific culture for shaping our future in which prosperity and peace, excellence and equity and oriental values and occidental methods of science converge and co-exist.
India is expected to emerge as a major economic power by 2035.
We should also emerge as a major knowledge power with high human and societal values.
Let me mention in this regard that it has been 83 long years since CV Raman won the Nobel Prize for Physics.
Another Nobel Prize in the sciences is long overdue for India.
I call upon scientific fraternity gathered here to rise upto this challenge and work towards this goal in a time bound manner.
At the outset, I would like to convey my sincere gratitude for the warm welcome and hospitality accorded to me and to my delegation.
It is a singular honour and privilege to address this distinguished gathering in the Belgium Parliament.
This Parliament, in more than 180 years of existence, has played a vital role in enriching the democratic fabric of Belgium.
India is no stranger to Belgium.
Our relationship dates back to early eighteenth century when traders from Belgium, under the flag of the Ostend Company, established settlements in East and South India.
It is said that Belgian chandeliers, mirrors and crystal ware can be found in places as diverse as palaces and ancient synagogues in India.
For us in India, Belgian glass is synonymous with all that is perfect, beautiful and prestigious.
The blood of our people is mixed with Belgian soil.
During the First World War, more than one lakh thirty thousand Indian soldiers fought in the battlefields of Belgium and Northern France and more than eight thousand five hundred made the supreme sacrifice.
Cemeteries in West Flanders pay tributes to these brave soldiers, many of whose names are carved in stone, at the imposing Menin Gate in Leper.
Today, India and Belgium are two vibrant democracies sharing common ideals and principles.
Democracy, rule of law, freedom of speech, independent judiciary, free press and protection of human rights are fundamental values to which our two societies are wedded.
In addition, India and Belgium are multi-cultural societies and our federal set-up provides for respect and promotion of rights and freedom of various communities and regions.
Our historical ties and our shared values provide us with a strong foundation for our relations.
I am happy that our countries have been expanding and deepening their partnership.
Belgium is now India's second largest trading partner within the EU.
In spite of the global crisis, our bilateral trade increased by more than forty per cent between 2007 - 2012.
Our investment flows have also steadily increased in the last few years with Indian investment in Belgium exceeding Belgian investment in India.
I hope that Belgian companies will actively consider taking advantage of our growing economy.
I am glad to note that the Indian community in Belgium is contributing to the Belgian economy.
Belgium's strengths in the financial and service sector, creative industry, digital economy, and research and development are well developed and widely recognised.
Culture and education are two natural areas where closer cooperation between us can benefit our peoples.
I am happy to note that several Memoranda of Understanding have been signed between our academic institutions during this visit.
I deeply appreciate the keen interest of the people of Belgium, and the support extended by the Government of Belgium, in organizing Indian cultural festivals in this beautiful country.
Tomorrow, I will be inaugurating Europalia-India festival along with His Majesty, the King of Belgium.
This festival will showcase rich and diverse Indian culture in its multiple facets.
I am confident that the cultural events will be appreciated by the people of Belgium.
India today is passing through an important phase in its history.
The boundless energy and creativity of its youth has provided India with unprecedented opportunities.
India is an ancient civilization but a young nation.
Out of the 1.2 billion people in India, approximately 400 million people are between the ages one to fourteen.
By 2030, we will have a dynamic work force of seven hundred million with an average age of thirty five.
We look forward to leverage these opportunities through our friends, such as Belgium, for economic prosperity and progress of our people.
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, may I request you to join me in a toast:
• To the health of His Majesty King Philippe and Her Majesty Queen Mathilde;
• To the health of His Excellencies Presidents of the Senate and the House of Representatives and honourable Parliamentarians;
• To the progress and prosperity of the friendly people of Belgium; and,
• To friendship and cooperation between India and Belgium.
Born in a remote village of Andhra Pradesh, he strived hard for the welfare of the country and rose to be its Prime Minister.
Influenced early in life by Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru, his disposition to devote his life for society was clear from his spirited participation in the nation's freedom struggle starting when he was only around 16 years of age.
Shri Rao was a leader who inspired many.
I too am one of them.
I had the opportunity to work with Shri Rao for many years and was impressed by his political sagacity, his depth of comprehension of complex issues and his steely resolve to find solutions to even the most intractable of them.
Late Shri Narasimha Rao, who was fondly called PV by many, will be remembered for his many contributions to the nation foremost amongst which, in my opinion, is his sterling success in taking the nation to the next level of reforms in 1991.
These economic reforms enabled the nation to traverse the path of realization of its economic potential.
He assumed the reins of the Prime Minister of India at a time when the country was confronted by severe economic problems.
It was a period when India's foreign currency reserves had plummeted to around US$ 1 billion that was barely sufficient to finance two weeks of imports.
Faced with the financial crisis, in an unprecedented and courageous move, he departed from the usual policy of appointing a senior political leader as the Finance Minister.
Instead, he appointed Dr. Manmohan Singh our present Prime Minister as Finance Minister.
He is an economic administrator and a well-known economist himself.
He gained rich experience in policy making as the Economic Affairs Secretary and RBI Governor.
He was entrusted as the doctor, with the responsibility of nursing and strengthening the economy.
Shri Rao displayed great foresight in making this choice and as the present bears witness, this was a brilliant decision that could not have come at a more appropriate time.
Shri Rao gave Dr. Manmohan Singh full freedom to navigate the crisis and introduce far-reaching economic reforms.
He lent full support to Dr. Manmohan Singh and the two together, took the nation on a path that has made India an economic powerhouse that the world today admires.
The duo of the practical politician and the economist Finance Minister, thus steered the nation through the economic crisis, admirably ushering in the seminal policy of economic liberalization.
In fact, Shri Rao had himself spearheaded the move for dismantling the license regime as the Prime Minister while holding additional charge of the Industry Ministry.
That a large number of big Indian corporate houses have today become the powerhouses of growth and have earned their spurs across the globe is in part on account of the vision of Shri Rao.
It is these economic reforms that were ushered in during his tenure as the Prime Minister, that have charted the course of our economic history since then.
The economic reforms unlocked the entrepreneurial skills of the Indian mind cutting across the various sectors of the economy.
In the financial sector, measures to bring capital adequacy and prudent norms for asset classification in our banks, licensing of new private banks, besides gradual decontrol of foreign exchange and currency convertibility were implemented.
With the objective of providing market orientation and to make our public sector enterprises competitive, private sector participation was encouraged through privatization and disinvestment.
Other sectoral reforms such as liberalization of foreign investment norms, external trade and tax reforms spawned the much-needed change in the incentive structure of the economy.
These measures unleashed the productive and competitive spirit dormant in our businesses.
The nature of the economic reforms appeared to some as revolutionary and encouraged many to oppose them.
But, the adoption of the policy of liberalization did not signal the end of the role of the state in pursuing the important task of social development.
This is where the pragmatism of Shri Rao was writ large.
While he recognized the need for a greater role for the private sector in the development of the nation's economy, he simultaneously emphasized the importance of state intervention in the development of human capital that was given the position of primacy in the Eighth Five Year Plan.
Towards the achievement of this goal, emphasis was laid on employment generation, literacy, education, health, drinking water and provision of adequate food and basic infrastructure.
The Government was fully willing to take the primary responsibility for providing the basic elements that would help the development of human capital.
These policies resulted in greater employment, reduction in poverty and self-sufficiency in agriculture and achieving 6.5% economic growth, the highest ever until then for any Five Year plan period.
Another important decision was India's accession to the WTO in January 1995 and Shri Rao's role in it was pivotal.
The Uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations, wide ranging agreements including the creation of WTO to subsume GATT had come to a halt and India's position under the then Government of VP Singh was hesitant and ambivalent.
The implications of India acceding to an all-encompassing multilateral trade regime met with strong domestic opposition.
I, as the then Commerce Minister, signed the multilateral WTO Trade Agreement at Marrakesh in April 1994 along with other nations.
His achievements were not limited to the economic sector alone.
Displaying great political sagacity, he was able to resolve many complex problems.
It was during his term as the Prime Minister that the extremist activities in Punjab saw its end.
A popular government was able to function after the elections under Beant Singh.
In ending the occupation of the Hazratbal shrine in Jammu & Kashmir by terrorist in 1993 without any damage to the holy shrine.
Late Narasimha Rao had a unique functioning style.
He understood the virtue of patience and depending on the exigencies of the situation, he was ready to wait till he achieved consensus.
When he decided to refrain from acting, it was with a singular purpose.
It was his unique style and political deftness that made him successful in leading a Congress minority Government after the 1991 General elections that gave the Congress party 232 MPs in the 10th Lok Sabha.
Yet his Government survived for the full five-year term and he achieved his feat laying the foundation for politics based on consensus.
Shri Rao is also credited with exemplary achievement in the foreign policy.
He was the Minister for External Affairs for around seven years during which he gave the nation some new foreign policy focus.
He steered the nation in the aftermath of Cold War building strong relations across the world and gave further impetus to the nation's nuclear and ballistic missile programme.
India became a Sectoral Dialogue partner of ASEAN in 1992 and a full Dialogue Partner in 1996.
The different dimensions of engagement culminating in Summit level partnership with ASEAN in the areas of trade, economic, culture and politics have since gained in strength bringing many benefits to our country and are directly attributable to the vision of Shri Rao.
As the Minister for Human Resources Development, he implemented the vision of late Shri Rajiv Gandhi to bring quality education to the poor and the marginalised by establishing the Navodaya Vidyalayas.
These have today grown into a chain of schools that is providing education to about 1.60 lakh students from the marginalised sections of the society.
Shri Rao's contribution also immensely benefited his home state of Andhra Pradesh.
First as a Minister and then as Chief Minister, he is credited with several far-reaching reforms.
As the Minister of Education in Andhra Pradesh, he took several initiatives that made the educational institutions more responsive to the needs of students.
He gave special emphasis on upgrading education in the field of Science and Technology.
As Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh from 1971 to 1973, he was steadfast in his commitments towards the implementation of Land Ceiling Act in the State.
This Act became one of the most effective Land Ceiling Acts in the country.
He had initiated these reforms amidst strong opposition with the singular goal of ushering in equity by bring benefit to the poor and the landless.
This made him one of the most forwarded-looking Chief Ministers of the state and his time.
Behind the political persona of Late Shri Narasimha Rao, which people are familiar with, there was also a man of letters, a distinguished scholars and linguist, whose command over 16 languages pleasantly surprised both Indians and foreigners alike.
He wrote fictions in Hindi, Marathi and Telugu, and translated literary works.
Shri Narasimha Rao is one of the few leaders who attracted admirers of different political hues.
This institution is truly the fountainhead of higher education in India.
It was founded in 1857 along with the Universities of erstwhile Madras and Kolkata, and had a key role in nurturing a number of leaders who led India to its independence.
This University has been the alma mater of Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar, Mahadev Govind Ranade, Ramkrishna Gopal Bhandarkar, Mangesh Wagle, Waman Abaji Modak and the matriculating institution for the Father of our nation, Mahatma Gandhi.
Today, each one of you students who are graduating join a band of great leaders and academicians who have graduated from this prestigious University.
My heartiest congratulations to all of you.
You fulfill this day not just your dreams but also the dreams of your parents, your family and your teachers.
The University of Mumbai has been blessed by various philanthropists and benefactors who contributed to this Heritage Convocation Hall with its remarkable and ageless grandeur.
Its stained glass work and its arches mutely exude beauty and enhance the awe that knowledge should rightly evoke amongst all of us present.
I believe the Fort Campus is amongst the world's most beautiful campuses of its kind.
This exemplifies the University's dedication to history and tradition in all its forms.
Over the years the University has shown deep commitment to being a mother institution to its hundreds of affiliated institutions and colleges.
Its own department, the Institute of Chemical Technology is now a deemed university.
As the City of Mumbai sought to create learning environments in neighbourhoods, the University of Mumbai has reached out and done its duty with poise and alacrity.
Today there are over 667 affiliated colleges and institutions it oversees and over 6.5 lakh students on its rolls.
It also has 57 Departments covering a breadth of subjects ranging from Humanities, Technology, Management, Commerce, Law and more.
As Mumbai has grown, so has the University of Mumbai.
It has campuses and sub-campuses from the Konkan coast to the teeming Mumbai Metropolitan expanse and reaching hinterland Thane district.
This has enabled the University of Mumbai enroll and provide access to both urban and rural citizens.
University of Mumbai has a glorious history and must rededicate itself to the building of India's future.
With India's youth seeking education and productive roles in society, it is even more critical that Universities reinvent themselves to deliver relevant knowledge and actionable skills.
Once we imbibe the book of humanity, many of the divisions and conflicts in society will meet their end.
For India to sit at the high table of global powers, it has to prepare its youth for an ever-shrinking world that shares resources as well as responsibilities through being knowledgeable, capable and sensitive to environmental and social issues.
Universities will need to reinvent themselves as enablers of society rather than gatekeepers of higher education.
The youth of our nation should be empowered to take our great nation, forward in leaps and bounds.
I am happy to note that the University of Mumbai has maintained a focus on new technologies and cutting edge thinking.
It has started new centres such as the Centre for Nanotechnology and also new international collaborations in the area of sustainable development technologies and approaches.
More and more such initiatives are needed for the developing world to understand each other and their special capabilities, creating space for new thinking in climate change and sustainability.
As you stand here after being granted degrees and honours, I would like to remind you that the purpose of education is not a good job or income but using the knowledge you have acquired in the service of the nation and mankind.
I sincerely hope that all of you will show the utmost zeal and love for humankind so that a better world can be gifted to our future generations.
In the age of smart phones and tablet computers, ideas now travel at the speed of thought.
It is important for us to remain up to date with what is happening in the world.
I am very happy to know that the University of Mumbai has introduced far-reaching changes in its examination technology through bar coding and use of communication technology to improve the processes.
The day is not far when we will see the emergence of a higher education system based on a seamless network of knowledge and learning as well as assessments of skill.
This will mean the teaching and learning environment will have to radically change.
Delivering lectures and presenting thought through written material is going to be ancillary to creating learning environments.
Professors, Lecturers and Teachers will emerge as facilitators of thought through multiple technology platforms and pathways.
This means even the teaching fraternity will have relearn, reengage and retrain themselves for the immediate future.
A true teacher regards himself as a student of his students.
I call upon the City of Mumbai and the Government of Maharashtra to be more proactive in preparing and providing for this new future.
Just as a few good men stepped up and helped build this university by supporting its construction and development in its early years, the State of Maharashtra and citizens of Mumbai will need to come up with ways and means to enable greater funding and partnerships with industry houses, other universities and central government bodies.
India has shown itself to be a secular, diverse and pluralistic society which is able to deal with change, challenges and aspirations over the last few decades.
This is only due to its abiding faith and belief in education.
India's future and that of the world it hopes to lead, as a great and powerful nation, is in the hands of its youth.
The demographic dividend of its youth can only be reaped through universities and institutions that commit themselves to delivering distributed learning environments.
Every aspiring student should find the university reaching him and not the other way around!!!
In conclusion, let me remind you of what Swami Vivekananda said on the role and relevance of education.
All of you graduates of the University of Mumbai are a living tribute to the faculty, staff and students who have, over the years, worked selflessly to bring the University to its present position of pre-eminence.
I congratulate all the students on whom the University has conferred diplomas, degrees and certificates.
This occasion is a reaffirmation that you have imbibed the knowledge and skills to face the world outside.
I urge you to stride onto your paths in life with a positive attitude and strong spirit.
Besides training and education, what will keep you in good stead is strength of character, strength of mind and strength of purpose.
I would like you to remember that what you do with knowledge is always up to you, but knowledge used in the service of the nation and mankind is always closer to God's intention.
I am delighted to be here today to inaugurate the Platinum Jubilee celebrations of Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan and the 125th Birth Anniversary of its illustrious founder, Dr. K.M.
He was of a small build.
But there was nothing small in what he achieved during his life time.
He was a towering personality who became a legend in his own life time.
Munshiji demonstrated excellence in diverse fields of human endeavour.
He was a writer, speaker, novelist, lawyer, teacher, Indologist, Constitutional expert, Administrator, Statesman, patriot and a promoter and sustainer of cultural, ethical and moral values.
His endeavor of establishing Bhartiya Vidya Bhawan, in 1938, was one of the most important steps in a series of selfless efforts put in by him in emancipating the citizenry of this nation.
The founding of the Bhavan echoed his deeply entrenched belief in the instrument of education, which he firmly believed could offer wings to the growth and development of India.
Born in the town of Bharuch, Gujarat, 125 years ago, Munshiji was always an excellent student.
His life was tremendously influenced by Sri Aurobindo Ghosh.
He took up law at the University of Bombay and enrolled himself as an advocate in 1913.
He acquired the reputation of a diligent and hardworking lawyer within a short span of time.
During World War I, he was greatly influenced by Dr. Annie Besant's Home Rule Movement until he came across a relatively better concept of governance which Gandhiji offered.
This led him to offer his whole hearted support for Sardar Patel's Bardoli movement and Gandhiji's salt satyagraha.
His active participation brought him in close quarters with Gandhiji and Sardar Patel, who mobilized his active participation within the Congress.
He started the movement for a Parliamentary wing of the Congress, became Secretary of the Congress Parliamentary Board in 1938 and served in the Central Legislative Assembly in the 1930s.
Gandhiji ignited Munshiji's zeal to serve the nation through active politics.
It is said that Aurobindo Ghosh instilled in him the love for jnanayoga while Gandhiji made him a Karmayogi.
Munshiji's solidarity and devotion to the cause of the nation was unparalleled.
When Nizam of Hyderabad was stubborn in acceding to the Union, it was Munshiji who was sent as the Agent General of the Government of India to Hyderabad in 1947.
He served there until its final accession in 1948.
It is said that if Sardar Patel was the architect of Hyderabad's accession to India, Munshiji was the engineer in the field.
Munshiji's contributions as Union Minister of Food and Agriculture from 1950-52 and Governor of the State of Uttar Pradesh from 1952 to 1957 were invaluable.
He also made far reaching contribution to the shaping of the Indian Constitution.
His incisive understanding of law and insight into India's cultural fabric made him one of the most outstanding members of the Constituent Assembly.
What might amaze many is that besides being on the Drafting committee, he was member of as many as eleven Committees, which made him perhaps the only Indian who played such a pervasive role in the drafting of the Constitution.
The principle of guaranteeing to every person equal protection of the laws was the result of a draft jointly written by Munshiji and Dr. Ambedkar.
Munshiji's sense of equality did not confine itself to mere legal protection.
He strongly advocated widow remarriage and to set an example, himself married a widow Lilavati Sheth in 1926.
Societal discrimination for delinquent children drove him to found a Children's Home for delinquent children at Chembur, Bombay in 1939.
His love and service to countrymen was thus unparalleled and driven by a strong sense of personal commitment.
A prolific writer and conscientious journalist, Munshiji started a Gujarati monthly called Bhargava, was joint-editor of Young India, and he started the Bhavan's Journal in 1954.
Some of his better-known books are: Gujarat and its Literature, Akhand Hindustan, Glory that was Gujardesh, The Ruin that Britain Wrought, The End of an Era, and Shishu ane Sakhi.
He was also President of the Sanskrit Viswa Parishad, the Gujarati Sahitya Parishad, and the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan.
Munshiji was one among three great dreamers of our country.
One was Mahatma Gandhi himself, who dreamt of a world without violence, a world of love and compassion.
The second dreamer was Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru who dreamt of an India strong, united and democratic, playing an important role in the world.
Munshiji was the third dreamer.
He dreamt of a cultural renaissance built on modifying the spiritual heritage of our country to suit modern conditions.
He wanted to make sure that every young person of his times and of the future should imbibe and benefit from India's cultural and spiritual heritage.
When the Culture is living, the promising young man and woman of the generation receive the impact of its fundamental values.
He believed that freedom would be meaningless and worthless unless cultural, ethical, and moral values are enshrined in the hearts and minds of our people.
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan which was started as an institution is now a massive cultural and educational movement.
It is a moral movement that steers people towards a life guided by ethics.
The Bhavan, is today rendering yeoman service to the people of our nation and through them to entire human kind.
What Munshiji expected to achieve through the Bhavan can be narrowed down to three main points: Firstly, he wanted the other worldliness in the outlook of people to be replaced by a sense of joy in the life as it is to be lived.
Secondly, he felt that outmoded traditions which stifle the creative vitality of individual and collective life must be replaced by a vigorous flexible attitude to life.
And, thirdly, the fundamental values which have given ageless inspiration to our culture had to be captured afresh for our generation.
Movements such as the Bhavan are the need of the day.
The Bhartiya Vidya Bhavan has stood the test of time and been a beacon light guiding Indians and foreigners alike in their path to live a balanced and wholesome life.
With 119 centers in India and around 7 centers abroad including the United States and the United Kingdom, Munshiji's dream of promoting ethical and spiritual values in day to day life is successfully accomplished by the Bhartiya Vidya Bhavan.
I pay my compliments to the staff of Bharatiya Viday Bhawan for their tireless efforts in translating Munshiji vision into reality.
It has conferred this honour on three outstanding citizens of our country today.
Each one of them is a brilliant star in their chosen field of activity.
I congratulate Bhavan on its wonderful choice.
Shrimati Kishori Amonkar, a towering maestro of Hindustani Shashtriya Sangeet, and legendary performer of Jaipur-atrauli Gharana, has given us pure joy for over half a century.
Shrimati Ila Bhatt, Gandhian, is an exemplary champion of social causes.
Her work has brought her and our country world renown and recognition.
I take great pleasure in inaugurating the celebrations of the Platinum Jubilee of Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan and the 125th Birth Anniversary of its great founder, Kulapati K.M.
Munshi.
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,
The origin of the Urban Co-operative movement in India can be traced to the close of 19th century.
Urban Co-operative credit societies, in their formative phase, came to be recognised on a community basis to meet the consumption oriented credit needs of their members.
Salary earners' societies inculcating habits of thrift and self-help played an important role in popularizing the movement, especially amongst the middle class as well as organised labourers.
The enactment of Co-operative Credit Societies Act in 1904 gave real encouragement to the movement.
The first urban co-operative credit society movement was registered in Kanchipuram in the former Madras Province in October 1904.
The Co-operative Credit Societies Act 1904 was amended in 1912 with a view to broad basing it to enable organisation of non-credit societies.
It soon became such a well established and useful system that during the banking crisis of 1913-14, when no fewer than 57 joint stock banks collapsed, there was a flight of deposits from stock banks to co-operative urban banks.
Over the years, urban co-operative banks have registered a significant growth in number, size and volume of business handled.
Co-operative Banks in our country face many challenges and problems; their performance across sectors, activities, and regions is variable; they need to re-orient themselves by improving their efficiency, and have to develop themselves professionally to meet the requirements of the communities that they serve.
They are perhaps still best way of reaching out into the vast hinterland of our nation where the poor and the marginalized sections may have few reliable banking options.
I am told that the bank has embarked into new areas and diversified its services considerably.
It has also taken up several philanthropic and charitable initiatives over the years.
I have no doubt that with its background of steady growth and sound policies, that Pandharpur Urban Co-operative Bank will continue to progress from strength to strength as it serves and supports the economic activities for this community.
I once again offer my felicitations and best wishes to the Management and shareholders of the Pandharpur Urban Co-operative Bank on the occasion of its centenary celebrations.
I wish all of you a very pleasant and happy New Year!
Jai Hind!
I am happy to participate in the Convocation of the SRM University.
It is a pleasure to be amongst some of the brightest young minds in the country.
I am very happy to know that SRM University is today a multi stream university with over 33000 students and 2300 faculty members, offering a wide range of programmes in Engineering, Management, Medicine, Science and Humanities.
The Community Medicine department runs a rural health centre and an urban health centre.
It conducts Health camps frequently and the University has signed an MoU with the Government of Tamil Nadu for a special Tribal health project.
I believe SRM University is also the first private University in India to design, develop and launch a satellite - the SRMSAT in collaboration with Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO).
The SRMSAT has been in orbit since one year and has completed 5173 orbits.
I am delighted to know foreign faculty members, flexible and dynamic curriculum, exciting research and global connections are features that set SRM apart.
In the context of meeting the objectives of higher education in today's competitive world, the SRM University has played an outstanding role over the past 27 years.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The country's economic progress is dependent on several critical factors.
The quality of our human resources is amongst the most important of them.
Higher education is the key to making available a large pool of skilled manpower for our nation.
Higher education not only decides a student's career prospects, but also shapes his or her personality.
Our country's education system is burdened with demands of both quantity and quality.
The numbers of students who seek admissions in universities today far exceed the capacity of government educational institutions.
We need many more universities to be able to address the demands of higher education.
And along with quantity, we also need to focus on quality.
The standards of higher education in India today need improvement.
In ancient India, we had universities like Nalanda and Takshashila which had established themselves as international centers of educational excellence where students from all over the world came and studied.
In contrast, many Indian students today choose to go abroad for higher studies.
We need universities to provide quality education that meet international benchmarks.
We must change the reality of our Universities not figuring in the list of top universities of the world.
Indian universities should aim at becoming top educational institutions in the world with global standards of research, teaching and learning.
With unlimited demands and limited resources, it is important that the private sector also contributes its best to the provision of higher education in India.
The private sector has played a key role in higher education in other countries across the world.
Many top universities including Harvard, Yale and Stanford are the result of efforts of the private sector.
There is no reason why Indian private sector cannot achieve similar results.
In India, students and parents are often skeptical of private universities.
They prefer education in old and established public universities as opposed to private universities which are mostly newly built.
To build the trust of the people, private universities must constantly prove themselves because they do not have the benefit of age.
They must be able to promise a good future to the students and make sure that they fulfill all of their promises.
I am happy to learn that this University has been able to secure good placements for its graduates.
While I congratulate the University and the graduates for this, I must also point out that universities should have a vision beyond placements.
Universities must satisfy the citizens that they are taking up the cause of education not for private profit but in public service.
As Mahamana Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya, the founder of Banaras Hindu University has said Universities should not merely turn out men and women as engineers, scientists, doctors, merchants, theologists, but also as people of high character, probity and honour, whose conduct through life would show that they bear the hallmark of a great university.
Of course, financial resources are an important consideration for all universities.
But, there must be a vision to create a world class institute and to nurture young people who will change the world into a better place for all of us.
Higher education has made significant contribution to economic development, social progress and political democracy in independent India.
But there is serious cause for concern at this juncture.
As we stand on the threshold of the XII th Five Year Plan, challenges continue to exist with respect to quality and the provision of relevant education.
Curricular reforms leading to regular revision and upgrading of curricula, introduction of semester system, choice-based credit system, and examination reforms are yet to take place in many higher educational institutions across the country.
There is a clear, almost unanimous, view that higher education needs a systematic re-look, so that India can educate much larger numbers without diluting academic standards.
The objectives of reform and change in our higher education system must be expansion, excellence and inclusion.
I understand that the private sector today accounts for about four-fifths of enrolment in professional higher education.
The standards of education, however, vary from institute to institute.
It is essential that a transparent framework for better service delivery be established in the field of private education.
The regulatory mechanism should facilitate accreditation of all educational institutions with clarity on incentives and consequences in order to improve quality, to ensure minimum benchmarks and to promote excellence in higher education.
Shortage of good faculty is a matter of serious concern.
While the requisite number of good quality teachers cannot be made available overnight, we must tackle the problem by bringing in innovative teaching methodologies such as technology-enabled learning and collaborative information and communication technologies.
Our teachers must be exposed to larger number of refresher courses and seminars so as to be up-to-date with the latest concepts in their discipline.
The SRM University has made a name for itself by imparting quality higher education in the private sector.
It should now strive to spread to other Institutions in the country some of its models of teaching and curricula which are novel and can be emulated.
The international advisory board it has established which advices the University on research, curricula and teaching methodology as well as the corporate advisory board which evaluates its engineering and management programmes based on industry trends, are important innovations which need to be adopted by others.
The SRM University's programme of arranging opportunities for its students and faculty to meet Nobel Laureates is also worthy of special mention in this regard.
I congratulate the Chancellor, Vice Chancellor, faculty members, and non-teaching staff of SRM University on their achievements and wish the University continued success in grooming young men and women to emerge as leaders in their chosen walks of life.
As I have already pointed out, education should be seen as a stepping stone to character building and societal development.
I hope that all of you will work diligently in future and contribute meaningfully towards nation-building.
I urge each one of you graduating today to always remember that your mission in life should be to wipe every tear from every eye, as exhorted by the father of our nation, Mahatma Gandhi.
Be just and fear none.
Fear only to do that which is ill and ignoble.
Stand up for right.
Love to serve your fellow-men.
Love the motherland.
Promote public weal.
Do good wherever you get a chance for it.
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
It gives me great pleasure to attend the fourth World Telugu Conference and address an audience comprising eminent personalities from Telugu language and literature.
I am happy to note that the Government of Andhra Pradesh, through this Conference is making a comprehensive attempt at promoting Telugu language and literature.
I understand that exposition of books, conduct of cultural programmes, convening of seminars and publication of special magazines form part of the activities being organized in connection with the Conference.
Telugu is one of the oldest classical languages of India.
Linguistic experts believe that Telugu was split from Proto-Dravidian languages between 1500 to 1000 BC.
Inscriptions dating back to 400 BC, containing Telugu words, have been discovered in Guntur district of Andhra Pradesh.
Despite the vast passage of time, the language has been successful in maintaining its basic character, and at the same time, evolving as a modern language.
The oldest works of Telugu literature are distinguished by their treatment of religious subjects.
