This would be unsustainable for the economy, with implications on its fiscal balance as well as its targets for growth and development.
India is fortunate to have been blessed with vast coal resources.
At the present level of production, these reserves could last for around 200 years.
As of now, coal meets around 52% of the total energy requirement in the country.
The total energy requirement in the country in 2016-17 that is the terminal year of the Twelfth Five Year Plan is estimated at around 738 million tonne of oil equivalent.
To meet our developmental needs and vast requirement of energy, the country in the next 10-15 years will have to rely more and more on coal.
In fact, coal should occupy a predominant position in our sources of energy supply.
However, to make increased dependence on coal a sustainable phenomenon, we will have to move towards cleaner technologies so that environment is not unduly stretched.
Another area that needs intervention is introduction of technology and processes that ensure a hazard free environment to workmen in this sector.
Moving into the 21st century, one can envision a restructured mining industry with multiple players.
We also need to recognize that in today's competitive environment, only cohesive, focused and, work-oriented organizations will survive.
I am sure that the mining industry will measure up to the challenges of our times.
I am confident that the National Safety Awards (Mines) will prove to be an excellent catalyst in upholding health, safety and welfare standards in our mines.
I once again congratulate all the award winners for their splendid efforts in encouraging mine safety.
JAI HIND.
I am happy to inaugurate the Mannam International Centre being established here in New Delhi by the Nair Service Society (NSS).
The founder of NSS, Mannath Padmanabhan, was a visionary and social reformer who was awarded the Bharat Kesari and Padma Bhushan.
He fought against social evils and strove for the economic upliftment of the people of Kerala.
He participated in the Vaikom Satyagraha in Kerala which led to streets around the Vaikom temple being opened to the socially under-privileged sections of the Hindu society as well as the Guruvayoor Sathyagraha which led to entry of underprivileged classes into temples.
Shri Padmanabhan worked with rare zeal and single-minded devotion for the transformation of the downtrodden in society.
He believed that caste should not be a dividing factor amongst human beings.
A strong believer in the concept of equality of human beings and in Mahatma Gandhi's methods of non-violence and Satyagraha, Mannam put his organisational and oratorical skills to best use to awaken the people of Kerala, especially the Nair community out of the decadence in which they had fallen.
Mannath Padmanabhan established and nurtured the Nair Service Society which has taken the lead in establishing numerous education institutions, medical establishments and industrial units across the state of Kerala.
The Karayogams that Mannam established were a pioneer of modern day self help groups.
I am glad to know the NSS has completed 98 years of existence and that the Delhi NSS has been in existence for over three decades.
I understand the newly established Mannam International Centre will provide care for senior citizens, health care to the under privileged, temporary shelter to the needy who visit the capital and space for community functions.
It will have a 24 hour helpline and a centre for research on the life and work of Mannam.
I wish the Centre all success and congratulate NSS Delhi on its initiative to create such an institution to serve the needs of the under privileged.
The NSS has a long tradition of being an organization which serves the needs of all communities.
Jai Hind.
I am delighted to be inaugurating the Silver Jubilee celebrations of the Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA), established 25 years ago in the memory of Mrs. Indira Gandhi.
The Centre seeks to fulfil her dream and vision for India as a strong nation where civilizational values, dignity of life, respect for nature and development go hand in hand.
The arts and all their manifestations were dear to Mrs.Gandhi.
The IGNCA was, accordingly, established as a Centre that would encompass the study of all forms of art in all their dimensions.
It has compiled, edited and translated some of the more significant texts on Indian arts and aesthetics.
IGNCA is also providing a creative platform for fostering dialogue between the arts and current ideas in philosophy, science and technology to bridge the gap in the understanding between modern sciences and arts and culture.
Some of the brightest minds from diverse fields have, over time, been associated with the work of the IGNCA.
India is different and exasperating.... You will not find any of your formal labels useful.
The Centre was the first to use modern day information technology to document, preserve and revitalize culture and cultural studies.
It has held theme-based exhibitions on Space, Time, Aakaar, Prakriti, Ritu-ritam and several others.
Its publications on fundamental texts and concepts of Indian thought reflect the Centre's endeavour to develop new approaches so necessary for developing a more meaningful understanding of Indian culture.
Today, as India stands at the threshold of substantive economic progress and scientific development, the role of culture as a balancing factor between progress and the inner needs of an individual; between his spiritual quest and material aspirations; between technological advancement and the need to maintain ecological parity cannot be over-emphasised.
The role of institutions such as IGNCA becomes more significant in this context.
Institutions like IGNCA constantly need to discover and re-invent new ways of establishing a creative and meaningful dialogue between different stakeholders and adding cultural dimensions to the development debate.
Recognising the stellar contribution of IGNCA over the years, I am happy to note that the President's Secretariat is presently collaborating with IGNCA for undertaking a multi-volume project on various aspects of Rashtrapati Bhavan's archaeological history, its making, its art and cultural artefacts.
I wish the project all success.
I also wish IGNCA the very best in its academic pursuits and hope that its network with the universities and institutions, both in India and abroad, would grow further.
It gives me great satisfaction to launch the INFORMATION, EDUCATION & COMMUNICATION CAMPAIGN against malnutrition.
I thank the previous speakers for a comprehensive introduction to the various aspects of this drive being taken up by the Ministry of Women and Child Development.
The birth anniversary today, of late Prime Minister Shrimati Indira Gandhi, is an apt occasion for commencing this campaign.
It is a tribute to her vision and leadership in prioritizing, through various Government programmes and policies, the numerous issues relating to the welfare of women and children in India.
It is a matter of concern that every third woman in our country is undernourished and every second woman is anaemic.
This is disturbing - and ironical - at a time when the Indian economy is on a strong positive growth trajectory.
This anomaly is indefensible at a time when we are making rapid strides in agricultural production, biotechnology and research and development not only in agricultural sciences but also in health and medical sciences.
Until we can ensure good nutrition and health for our children and their mothers we cannot achieve our targets of sustained and inclusive growth.
Utmost priority must be accorded to prevent malnutrition - as early as possible and across the life cycle, to avert irreversible cumulative deficits in the growth and development of our young.
Early marriage and ignorance about nutritional needs of infants also trigger a series of causative factors.
Clearly, a vibrant societal awareness and collective efforts of Government, complemented by grass-roots organizations is the route to preventing maternal and child malnutrition.
At present, there is a convergence of major Government of India programmes which duly target malnutrition in women and children.
The approach in dealing with the nutrition challenge is at two levels: firstly, the multi-sectoral, indirect approach for accelerated action on the determinants of malnutrition in all nutrition-related sectors.
Secondly, direct and targeted interventions for specific vulnerable groups, such as children under six years, pregnant and nursing mothers as well as adolescent girls.
There are a number of national programmes directly or indirectly contributing to improved nutrition outcomes.
Apart from the Integrated Child Development Services, these include the Rajiv Gandhi Scheme for Empowerment of Adolescent Girls, the Indira Gandhi Matritva Sahyog Yojana, National Rural Health Mission, Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan, National Rural Drinking Water Programme, Mid Day Meals Scheme, Targeted Public Distribution System, National Food Security Mission, Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme and the National Rural Livelihood Mission among others.
This campaign will contribute in a significant way and give an impetus to these ongoing schemes.
I note that the campaign has evolved through a consultative process involving concerned stake-holders.
I understand that it will be executed in four stages to systematically inform and advise the target populations and anchor their responses in fighting malnutrition.
I am told that Shri Aamir Khan has given probono services for the campaign and UNICEF has given technical support to the programme.
I recognize their valuable contribution - and that of all the participants who have given their time and energy to develop the campaign.
The mobilisation of public support is a critical requirement for preventing malnutrition through early action.
I expect that this campaign will create an enabling social and media environment that enables families and communities to understand the malnutrition challenge very clearly - and to take informed collective action, to address it.
Community awareness would further motivate effective utilization of child care and health services and encourage communities to identify with and supplement Government efforts.
I am happy to note that the launch of the campaign has coincided with the government's approval of Strengthening and Restructuring of Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS).
I recall that it was the determination of the then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi that resulted in this programme being launched in 33 community development blocks in 1975 to become today the world's largest and most unique programme for integrated early childhood development.
I am confident that the IEC campaign will result in effective social mobilization, programme implementation and a scaling up of synergies and intersectoral convergences.
I congratulate the Ministry of Women and Child Development who have undertaken the campaign in pursuance of the initiative of the National Council on India's Nutrition Challenges led by Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh.
The festival signifies not only the victory of good over evil but also the banishment of the forces of darkness and ignorance and welcoming of the light of enlightenment.
I am happy to say that IITF, over the last 3 decades, has significantly contributed towards enlightening the world about the narration of India's growth.
It has acted as a vehicle for showcasing India's economic and social development over the last three decades while itself gaining in popularity and moving from strength to strength.
I congratulate the management of India International Trade Fair.
Economic changes necessarily have social ramifications.
In order to keep pace with the rapid global changes, we need to constantly fine-tune the skills of our work force.
There is an urgent need to bring skill development and vocational training to the centre-stage of our developmental processes.
In order to reach the target of skilling 500 million persons by the year 2022, it is necessary that apart from government agencies, industry led fora address the issue of integrating skilled manpower into the mainstream of economic growth.
India has been a model of self-reliance and a source of inspiration to many developing countries.
Our relentless struggle to overcome poverty, illiteracy and ill-health has been watched with keen interest by the international community.
The fact that a country with a primarily agro-based economy and a burgeoning population could make its presence felt in diverse fields such as information technology, heavy industries, communications, nuclear energy, space research, electronics, etc., has been acknowledged and admired the world over.
It is heartening to note that India's external trade, that is, merchandise exports plus imports, as a proportion of the GDP has more than doubled, from less than 20 per cent at the turn of the last century to around 45 per cent in recent years.
It is also a matter of satisfaction that India's exports registered a 5 fold increase in the last decade.
The compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of India's exports which was 8.2% in the 1990s increased to 19.5% during 2000-01 to 2008-09.
India's share in global exports also increased from 0.7% in 2000 to 1.5% in 2010.
Its ranking in the leading exporters improved from 31 in 2000 to 20 in 2010.
India has also achieved considerable diversification in its export basket and its export destinations, with countries in Asia and Africa gaining ground relatively over USA and Europe.
The Government has also recently unveiled several policy measures designed to put the economy back on a high growth trajectory.
Important among these have been the decisions to allow Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in multi-brand retail and the civil aviation sector and seek legislative approval for increasing the FDI cap in the insurance and pension sectors.
Simultaneously, measures have also been announced to keep Government's subsidy burden in check thereby bringing about a reduction in the fiscal deficit.
These measures should help in restoring the economy's growth momentum.
Trade Fairs of the type and scale of the India International Trade Fair have few parallels.
Most importantly, however, the fair has been an excellent platform for small and micro enterprises to showcase their products and penetrate both domestic and international markets at attractive prices without compromising with quality.
As we know, these MSMEs are a source of rural empowerment, which is one of the key objectives of Government's agenda of inclusive growth.
It needs no mention that skill building is an integral part of a nation's economic progress.
ITPO has done commendable work in bringing all stakeholders together to share their experience at this important event.
In my last tenure as the Union Finance Minister, I still recall that we operationalized the National Skill Development Corporation in October 2009, with a target of skilling 15 crore persons.
Since then it has covered a lot of ground.
The Corporation has already made a funding commitment of more than Rs 1200 crore for various projects that are expected to train 6.2 crore persons in the next 10 years and augment vocational training capacity by 1.25 crore per year in private sector.
By March 2012, The National Skill Development Corporation partners had opened about 500 permanent and 2500 mobile centres in 220 districts across 24 States, thereby imparting training to 89,500 persons.
I am sure that the National Skill Development Corporation will continue to build-on these initiatives.
Finally, I would like to quote a few words from Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru, the architect of modern India, on whose birthday we celebrate the opening of the India International Trade Fair:
11th November is celebrated as National Education Day to commemorate the birth anniversary of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, who was a great visionary, freedom fighter, scholar, secularist, eminent educationist and the first Education Minister of India.
Dedicating this day, in this manner, is not merely the nation's way of remembering Maulana's contribution for laying the firm foundations of education in Independent India but also in visualising the path and progress that the Indian education system must take forward at all levels.
On this occasion, it would be appropriate to remember this great leader and recall his contribution in according high priority to education and its role in the making of a vibrant and modern India.
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad was one of the most important leaders of our independence movement, who championed the cause of unity of India during and after the struggle for Independence.
As India's first Education Minister, he was convinced that education is the tool of social transformation.
Maulana Azad realised that the country could achieve a higher level of progress and advancement only by making the education system more practical, pragmatic and responsive to the immediate demands of society and industry.
Realising the need and importance of education, he set up a number of educational commissions, boards and institutions such as the University Grants Commission and the Indian Institutes of Technology.
When we look at the legacy of Maulana, we need to appreciate his overall contribution which was not merely confined to education, but also to various other spheres of life.
His involvement in the Khilafat Movement gave him the opportunity to come into close contact with Mahatma Gandhi and his association thereafter is legendary.
The significance of Maulana Azad's struggle becomes evident today when we recall that as a national leader, he took a tough stand against communalism.
He strongly opposed separate electorates based on religion, and called for an independent India committed to secularism.
He also supported the ideology of socialism, which spurred him to fight inequality, poverty and other economic problems.
Maulana Azad was also fully conscious about the composite cultures of India.
Therefore, to bridge the socio-religious and cultural gaps and to enrich Indian culture and heritage, he set up a number of institutions of national importance such as Lalit Kala Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and Sahitya Akademi.
Maulana Azad was also the President of the General Conference of UNESCO in 1956 and I am glad that the Director General of UNESCO Ms. Irina Bokova is amidst us today.
Maulana Azad had firm faith in the fact that every individual should have the right to education that would enable him to develop his faculties and live a full human life.
He further said that such education was the birthright of every citizen.
The enactment of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act of 2009 is a culmination of Maulana's dream.
The Ministry of Human Resource Development is currently implementing a policy of quality education for all with special focus on marginalised and disadvantaged groups.
The Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan has a special focus on education for girls and children belonging to disadvantaged groups and weaker sections and ensuring availability of primary and upper primary schools near habitation as prescribed under the Act.
Further, to achieve the goal of Inclusive Education at school level, the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan seeks to ensure that every child with special needs, irrespective of the kind, category and degree of disability, is provided meaningful and quality education.
The RTE Act even provides the option of home based education for children with severe disability.
Presently, I am told that the number of schools has increased to 13.04 lakhs and the Gross Enrolment Ratio has reached close to 120%.
Meeting the national goals shall always be a challenge, but we have to address it in a comprehensive and effective manner.
I am glad to note that quality of education is getting due attention under the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan with more emphasis on building teacher capacity, teacher training and motivation, promoting effective pedagogy, and improving district and block level capacity for better management of the school education system.
The successful implementation of the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan has necessitated strengthening of the secondary school system through the Rashtriya Madhyamic Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA).
This was launched in 2009-2010 to raise enrolment in secondary education, focus on science, mathematics and English teaching, improve retention and reduce the gender, social and regional gaps in enrolment.
Government will focus on strengthening the capacity at secondary and senior secondary schools level.
6000 Model schools are in the process of being set-up - of which 2500 would be under the public private partnership mode.
The introduction of Information and Communication technology in schools will generate educational content and make it accessible to schools through the network being created under the scheme.
Other schemes launched at secondary level will also continue to promote the objective of quality education with enhanced enrolment at this level too.
It is equally vital to carry forward the important task of skill development in our youth if we want to fully realise the dividends from the demographic orientation of our country.
I am informed that the Ministry of Human Resource Development has recently brought out a National Vocational Education Qualification Framework (NVEQF) which provides for horizontal and vertical mobility between the vocational education and general education.
The task of skill building should be taken up on a very large scale so as to properly equip and motivate the youth of our country for jobs and the country's economic growth.
I would emphasise that Technology Enabled Learning is a very important aspect of education.
This must be adapted to our specific needs and introduced expeditiously in all educational institutions across the country.
I am happy that UNESCO, in collaboration with Government of India is establishing the Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Peace and Sustainable Development - which will be a Category-I Institute of UNESCO in Asia.
It is indeed befitting that the Institute is named after the Father of our Nation, Mahatma Gandhi and is being launched today on the birth anniversary of another great Son of India, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad.
As Swami Vivekananda had believed, a country's future depends on its people.
To him, education was not merely collection of information, but something more meaningful; education should give a perspective of life and build character.
To him education was an assimilation of noble ideas.
With these few words, I extend greetings to teachers, students and stakeholders in our Education system across the nation on this Education Day.
I congratulate the Ministry of Human Resource Development for all the initiatives they have undertaken and wish them success in policies and programmes in the years to come.
Thank you.
Mediation as process of dispute resolution is not new to India.
Much before the British arrived, the Panchayat system of India was a forum where respected village elders assisted in resolving disputes within the community.
Such traditional mediation continues to be prevalent in villages and our tribal communities even today.
In pre-British India, mediation was popular among businessmen.
Impartial and respected businessmen were requested by business association members to resolve disputes using an informal procedure, which combined techniques similar to those that exist today.
Even though these processes lacked legal authority, such mediation processes were regularly used and commonly accepted by Indian disputants.
The British regime brought with them the system of Anglo-Saxon jurisprudence which continues till date.
But alternative dispute resolution processes continued to reinvent themselves post independence and in 1987 with the introduction of the Legal Services Authorities Act, we saw the revival of the ancient mediation process in the new form of Lok Adalats.
It is important to recognize that despite the robust, independent and impartial judicial system we have in our country, the unfortunate reality is that legal disputes can be both protracted and expensive.
There is a high degree of public frustration over the complexity of the laws, long delays and unproductive use of their resources in litigation.
Alternate dispute resolution mechanisms not only facilitate speedier justice but is also a process wherein the parties involved have control over the eventual outcome.
This results in quick implementation of the decisions taken and eliminates continued litigation in the form of further appeals.
Notably if a matter gets resolved by mediation, then a substantial part of the court fees deposited by the litigant also gets returned to them.
It is for these reasons that throughout the business world, and especially in common law jurisdictions, there is a recognition that properly conducted mediations are the most effective means by which parties in civil and commercial disputes can resolve the matters that divide them.
It is well known that mediation can play a very useful role in amicable resolution of matrimonial and family matters.
Disputes amongst Government departments and agencies are also perhaps best resolved through out of court mediation rather than litigation.
I compliment the Supreme Court of India for having established in 2005 the Mediation and Conciliation Project Committee and for its efforts to promote and encourage Alternative Dispute Resolution methods across the country.
Only if Alternative Dispute Resolution becomes an integral part of the Indian justice delivery system will we be able to truly safeguard the welfare of the common man in India.
Stakeholders need to be made fully aware of the nature, merits, limitations and consequences of their action when involved in a dispute.
The best way to reach people early in the dispute is through disseminating information about mediation, increasing public awareness and making information on Mediation and Conciliation generally accessible and available to all.
It is not sufficient to popularize mediation in the cities.
Every Society is ridden with inertia to change.
People are aware of the options but more comfortable with the time-tested notion of litigation.
Litigation has been the first option of those seeking justice and it is natural for them to move the courts for redressal of their disputes.
However, this is where the District Courts and Judiciary can and must play a major role.
They need to be able to convince litigants that mediation offers benefits with a human touch.
It has no winners or losers.
It has no limitations or restrictions.
It is a pragmatic and flexible path that is in the interest of everyone involved.
Legal education in today's India also needs to incorporate alternate methods of dispute resolution as an essential course for a new breed of socially conscious lawyers.
I have always found that effective communication combined with sensitivity to the concerns of individuals concerned makes resolution of most disputes possible.
At a very basic level, all that is required is an informal and confidential process and third party assistance that can help negotiate and amicably resolve matters in the common interest.
It is not about cutting the pie, but making all feel victorious in the process.
I wish the Mediation and Conciliation Project Committee all success in their endeavours to promote Alternate Dispute Resolution.
I call upon all stakeholders gathered here to take up this cause in full earnest, building on our past traditions and keeping in mind the benefit to the common man.
It is indeed a happy occasion for me to be amongst you today for presenting the National Awards, Shilpguru Awards and Sant Kabir Awards for the years 2009 and 2010 to the Master Crafts persons and Weavers.
I congratulate all the awardees present for their contribution in preserving, promoting and enriching the traditional and cultural heritage of our country.
I am confident that this recognition for your workmanship shall inspire and encourage others to work hard and emulate your efforts to bring prosperity to artisans and weavers across the country.
Handlooms form a precious part of our national legacy.
This rich heritage has been kept alive by those professionally skilled weaver households that are linked with the age-old tradition of weaving.
Weavers with their skillful blending of myths, faiths, symbols and imagery provide their fabric an appealing dynamism.
The strength of handloom lies in innovative designs, which cannot be replicated by the machines.
Every part of India, every province, district and almost every single village has a cherished craft tradition of its own.
Working on a variety of raw materials ranging from hard objects like stone and metal to soft sandalwood and clay, our craftpersons create objects of great beauty.
What is notable is that these objects of beauty are also an integral part of the life rhythms of our people.
Be it the great Teracotta of Bankura and embroideries of West Bengal; the stone sculptures of Mamallapuram, Ellora and of Konark, the world-famous bronzes of the south, the intricate cane and bamboo objects made in our North-East, all of them represent the collective ethos of our civilization.
They represent our commitment to excellence and to a higher aesthetic sense that has marked our artistic endeavors down the ages.
Relevance of handicrafts in today's India is not confined to its great romance with our history and civilization.
The fact that more than 6 million persons still practice the crafts, demonstrates the importance this sector assumes in our national economy.
A major part of our rural populace derives their livelihood from home and cottage based activities like Handicrafts and Handlooms.
With our agricultural sector already overburdened, the role of handicrafts and handlooms for generating income and employment cannot be over emphasized.
Simultaneously, the Government needs to provide enabling policy support which promote sustainable growth of these two important sectors of our economy.
The Indian economy is passing through testing times on account of recent slowdown in the world economy as a whole.
The slow down has affected many sectors.
The Handlooms and Handicrafts sectors derive their sustenance predominantly based on human inputs, which are not easily replicable by machines.
Herein lies the Unique Selling Proposition (USP) of our exquisite handlooms and handicrafts products.
To fully harness the inherent potential of our artisans and weavers, we need to constantly endeavor to get them access to markets within India and abroad.
Conferring of awards today is not, therefore, a mere ritual but a humble way to recognize the outstanding contribution made by the weavers and craftpersons of India to fostering creativity and bolstering the economy of our country.
I hope when you go back to your homes you will carry a ray of hope to your fellow artisans and weavers.
You will function as torch bearers to guide them to reach the pinnacle in pursuit of their respective crafts so that one day they too could be the proud winners of such awards.
I take this opportunity to once again congratulate all the craftsmen and weavers who have won Awards and convey my best wishes to them for success in all their future endeavours.
JAI HIND
It gives me immense pleasure to be here in Raipur on the occasion of inauguration of the New Integrated Terminal at Raipur Airport.
I am extremely happy that Raipur Airport has been named after the saint/philosopher and visionary Swami Vivekananda.
After Kolkata, Raipur is the place Swamiji spent the largest number of years of his life.
This year is his 150th birth anniversary and we also have only recently marked 100 years of civil aviation in India.
It is therefore most appropriate that the Airport be named after him.
I hope that this Airport will help build bridges between Chhattisgarh and the rest of India as well as the world.
I am confident it will help bring a large number of tourists and business people to the beautiful and mineral resource rich state which has a hard working and talented population.
Airports serves as gateways to the country.
They are economic magnets which help further development and growth of the region where they are located.
The first impression about the state of infrastructure in a city or a state comes from the facilities at the Airport.
Airports serve as an effective medium for the movement of goods and services from one region to the other.
State Governments today also acknowledge the importance of having sufficient airports in their State to have better connectivity between various cities.
I hope Chhattisgarh State Government, with the help of Civil Aviation Ministry and Airports Authority of India will develop more airports in the State.
I dedicate this airport to the Nation and wish the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Airports Authority of India all success in their endeavours to build state-of-the-art infrastructure in the country.
I hope that this new terminal will not only support growth and prosperity of this state but also that of the country as a whole.
I thank Civil Aviation Ministry, Airports Authority of India and Chhattisgarh State Government for inviting me to this function.
Jai hind
This is my first visit to Chhattisgarh after assuming the office of President.
I am extremely happy that this occasion affords me the opportunity to meet a cross section of the vibrant literary and academic communities of this new and fast growing State.
I extend my warm greetings to you all - and through you, to more than 25 million people of this young State on this auspicious occasion.
Chhattisgarh is a new state with rich ancient history and a glorious cultural heritage.
It is believed to be the land of Kausalya, the mother of Lord Rama and the Tapo-bhumi of Saint-Poet Valmiki.
It is gifted by Nature with a green umbrella spread over almost 45% of the territory.
The demographic canvas of Chhattisgarh presents a unique kaleidoscope from Sarguja in the north to Bastar in the south.
Almost 32% of its population is comprised of the tribals including some primitive tribes.
It has been the center of attraction for anthropologists of various countries including the famous Varrier Alvin whom Mahatma Gandhi used to regard as his fourth son.
Alvin spent several fruitful years of his life in Bastar and authored many important books on the life and culture of Bastar tribals.
In order to apprise myself about the rich culture of this area, I shall also be visiting Narayanpur, the gateway to Abujmarh.
Chhattisgarh is the State where the famous Kalchuri dynasty ruled for almost 800 years and it has a rich legacy of one of the oldest Panchayati-raj systems in the country.
After its formation, Chhattisgarh has emerged as one of the fastest developing States in the country.
This young state has registered all round development on many fronts and made its presence felt at the national level.
It is heartening to know that Chhattisgarh is attracting tourists from different parts.
It also has ancient religious and spiritual centers of pilgrimage like Shivrinarayan, Rajivlochan and Champaran, the birthplace of Mahaprabhu Vallabhacharya.
Swami Vivekananda spent several years of his childhood in Raipur.
The largest period of his life after Kolkata was spent in Raipur.
While waiting for the train, he wrote a beautiful poem at Bilaspur railway station which is proudly displayed there.
Mahatma Gandhiji visited Chhattisgarh thrice during the freedom struggle and had amply acknowledged its contribution to the national Freedom Struggle.
I salute the great freedom fighters of this land on this occasion.
Chhattisgarh has large number of followers of two great saints, namely Sant Kabir and Guru Baba Ghasidas who have enlightened us with their profound spiritual wisdom.
Chhattisgarh is thus not only located at the heart of India geographically but also embodies the best of Indian culture, heritage and traditions as well as its natural beauty.
I take this opportunity to congratulate all the prominent persons from different walks of life who have been felicitated for their important contributions in their respective fields.
It shows that talent is abundant in Chhattisgarh which reflects its vibrant and dynamic society.
I am delighted to know that Naya Raipur is the first planned capital city of 21st century in India and is being developed as a modern and green city.
Special features such as rain water harvesting and harvesting of solar energy has been included to make it eco-friendly.
Comfort and security to the citizens is being ensured through dedicated bus lanes, cycle tracks, pedestrian pathways and barrier free movement.
A bus rapid transit system (BRTS) is also being developed from the initial stage to provide green and clean public transport system.
I compliment the leadership of the State for developing the city of Raipur with vision and a commitment to sustainable urban development.
I congratulate the people of this State on the occasion of Rajyotsava and dedicate the new Mantralaya building to the service of the people.
I hope that Chhattisgarh will continue to live up to the expectations of the Nation and march ahead by attending to the needs of all sections of its people especially the poorest of the poor.
Jai hind
It is also an occasion to reflect on the contribution made by Dr Durgabai Deshmukh to the cause of women and social development.
She was a Parliamentarian, an institution builder and a pioneer in social development.
She was the first Chairperson of the Central Social Welfare Board.
As a Member of the Planning Commission, she endeavored to integrate, consciously and systematically, the element of social development into the planning process.
For this task, she set up the Council for Social Development as a platform for generating new ideas and for research, advocacy and field experiments in social development.
Nor can it alone see to the preventive services that keep a society healthy.
Government is committed to the development of the weaker and vulnerable sections of our society.
It aims at a process of rapid and inclusive growth based on empowering the citizens of the country through education and skill development.
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme and the National Rural Livelihood Mission are important initiatives to provide employment opportunities.
Similarly, the National Urban Livelihood Mission is shifting its focus from metropolitan cities to Class One and Medium Towns.
The National Programme for the Urban Homeless is a new scheme which will bring shelter and relief to the destitute.
Gender budgeting has been duly integrated into our planning process to ensure that each and every developmental sector gives due emphasis to the participation of women in our nation's growth and progress.
However, achievement of the desired goals can become a reality only with the concerted effort of the Government, private and voluntary sectors.
Voluntary efforts for social welfare has deep roots in the history and heritage of India.
Whether it is empowerment at grassroots level or emergency assistance, the voluntary sector enjoys considerable advantage due to its innovative, multi-sectoral and motivated approach.
Voluntary organizations have played an important role in the shaping of participatory democracy in India.
They have reached into remote and sometimes inhospitable terrain and approached weaker sections of our society with empathy and understanding.
There has, therefore, been due attention, in our Five Year Plans, to galvanizing public cooperation through the deep and wide network of the voluntary organizations.
Presently, the Planning Commission has initiated a Non Governmental Organisations Partnership System with the participation of about 11 Ministries and Organisations.
These include the Ministry of Women and Child development, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Department of Higher Education and others.
I am sure this initiative will impact positively on sections that it is intended for.
The organizations who have received awards today have distinguished themselves through their outstanding contribution to society.
The Mizoram Widows Association, the Peoples Forum Association, the Sumangali Sewa Ashram in Bangalore and the Snehalaya of Ahmednagar, Maharashtra have brought hope and dignity to women and children who need the support of Government and society.
They have given a new direction to the lives of disadvantaged sections of our society including widows, destitute women and abandoned and underprivileged children.
They have worked in difficult and remote parts of the country rescuing and rehabilitating the exploited.
They have given the gift of education to the deprived and underprivileged among them - and helped them to be self-reliant through vocational training, micro-credit and other assistance.
I have no doubt that they will inspire the hundreds of other organizations like themselves, located all over India - in rural as well as urban centres.
With these few words, I once again congratulate the Central Social Welfare Board for instituting this prestigious award.
I offer my felicitations to the four awardees of the prestigious Dr Durgabai Deshmukh awards for the years 2005, 2006 and 2007 and wish them success in their future endeavours.
An innovative approach becomes even more imperative in our context, where there is a huge reservoir of unmet needs in areas such as health, education, water, food security and energy.
Innovation can provide solutions to such challenges and, in the process, also enable many more people to harness the gains from India's growth story.
India has tremendous untapped potential for innovation.
Not only does our demographic dividend and thriving democracy provide fertile ground for innovation, but our population of 550 million persons aged below 25 makes it imperative that we innovate to meet their needs in a sustainable manner, while also creating new opportunities for them.
The prime focus has to be on affordability, sustainability and scalability.
India today needs to innovate products and services that are affordable and which do not compromise on either efficiency or quality.
This model of innovation must pervade our working environment if we are to truly empower people of our nation.
It can also serve as a model of sustainable development for the rest of the world.
I am happy to note that the National Innovation Council has undertaken several initiatives to set the country firmly on the path to innovation, with a special focus on inclusive growth.
The Council has been working towards creating mechanisms to finance innovative enterprises focussed at the bottom of the income pyramid and is geared to launch the India Inclusive Innovation Fund.
India has an estimated 5,000 small and medium scale regional industry clusters which are unable to utilize their full potential and whose productivity needs to be optimised.
The National Innovation Council has been working towards seeding innovations in these industry clusters, while focussing on small and medium enterprises, by facilitating the creation of Industry Innovation Clusters to drive job creation and productivity.
The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research are also supporting the National Innovation Council in this effort.
We look forward to the results of these interventions in enhancing the innovation quotient of the clusters and in boosting job creation.
Inculcating and promoting the spirit of innovation in educational institutions can lay the groundwork for enhancing the impact of innovation in society and in realising our demographic dividend.
National Innovation Council has also been taking steps to nurture innovation in schools and colleges through improvements in curriculum, spotting talented innovators among students, and awarding Innovation Fellowships.
The Council is also working closely with the Ministry of Human Resource Development to give shape to these initiatives.
I am pleased to learn that the Ministry plans to launch 1,000 scholarships under the National Innovation Scholarship Scheme from the academic year 2013.
I am told that the National Innovation Council and the Ministry of Human Resource Development have been working together towards the creation of a Meta University, as a global first.
The Meta University will ride on the National Knowledge Network and will promote multi-disciplinary learning.
I am happy to know that Ministry of Communications and Information Technology is working on the rural broadband plans of the Government, which aim to connect all 250,000 panchayats in the country on a broadband network.
This rural broadband network will constitute an unprecedented opportunity for unleashing grassroots innovation by empowering rural citizens not only through access to information, but also through relevant applications in areas such as education, health and skill development.
While innovation is a result of networks and collaborations among multiple actors, Governments can play a key role in facilitating the right enabling framework in which these actors can interact.
The National Innovation Council too has been working to create an institutional framework for promoting innovations in Government by facilitating the setting up of State Innovation Councils in each State, and Sectoral Innovation Councils aligned to Union Government Ministries.
I am hopeful that this will encourage various arms of the Government to think out of the box.
I compliment Mr Pitroda and his team at the National Innovation Council for these pioneering initiatives.
I also appreciate the full support that the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology has extended to the Council's endeavours.
I wish the National Innovation Council all success as it goes forward in its task of catalysing innovation in the country.
These All India Lokayukta Conferences, bring different stakeholders together so that views can be shared on the challenges and best practices.
With such a wide range of experienced participants, I am sure the discussions will bring forth concrete suggestions and initiatives for strengthening Lokayuktas and making them more effective.
In recent times, there has been concern over the need to ensure that the corridors of power remain untainted by corruption or nepotism and that there is optimum utilization of resources and funds for their intended purposes.
This national conference is therefore timely.
For the successful working of democracy, people should be confident that Government policies are formulated and implemented with honesty, transparency and fairness.
Despite having minimal power to implement decisions, the Ombudsman played a very useful role in these countries by bringing humanism in governance.
It is in recognition of the need for a mechanism which would investigate corruption amongst public persons and help bring probity in governance that Lokayuktas have been set up across the country and a Lok Pal is under consideration at the center.
I understand at present 19 Lokayuktas have been set up by State Governments.
I would urge the remaining states to also consider establishing similar institutions at the earliest and learn from the best practices of successful Lokayuktas within the country.
In the States where Lokayuktas have been set up, different Acts govern their establishment and the provisions relating to the eligibility of Lokayukta, its jurisdiction, procedures, powers and infrastructure widely vary.
There is no uniformity in the functioning of Lokayuktas of different States and their effectiveness differs from State to State.
I am sure this conference will discuss these issues threadbare.
It is imperative that Lokayuktas, who are currently in office inspire confidence of the people by conducting impartial and independent inquiries in pursuit of truth.
State Governments must facilitate the Lokayuktas in the full implementation of the legislative mandate entrusted upon them and not see them as a nuisance or interfering in governance.
Lokayuktas must be provided adequate financial and administrative autonomy.
The Lokayuktas must at the same time remember that their duty is not just to indict public functionaries when they are guilty but also to protect them when nothing is found wrong with their conduct and to correct wrong perceptions about them with equal force and earnestness.
It must be ensured that in the name of checking corruption, vilification campaigns are not carried out to defame or destroy reputations.
False allegations aimed at impugning reputations are bad.
The institution of Lokayukta is an ally to good governance not an obstruction to development.
Finally, let me repeat what I said in my Independence Day address to the nation earlier this year.
Anger against the bitter pandemic of corruption is legitimate as is the protest against this plague.
But, this should not become an excuse for an assault on our democratic institutions.
Institutions are the visible pillars of our Constitution, and if they crack then the idealism of our Constitution cannot hold.
Our institutions may have suffered from the weariness of time.
The answer is not to destroy what has been built, but to re-engineer them so that they become stronger than before.
Institutions are the ultimate guardians of our liberty.
The judiciary of our country is the ultimate sentinel of justice and arbiter of truth and the Parliament is the custodian of the people's aspirations and the architect for implementing their dreams.
Over and above the Constitutional scheme of the Executive, Legislature and Judiciary, we have, in recent times, given ourselves the Right to Information, Legal Aid, Autonomous Investigation Agencies and a host of beneficial legislation.
The Lok Pal Bill is before the Parliament.
New laws for imposing sanctions for bribery by foreign agents, transparency in public procurement, citizens' grievances redressal etc are also under consideration.
All these must strengthen existing institutions of accountability not displace them or undermine them.
We must also distinguish bonafide errors of judgment from graft and corruption, civil wrong from criminal intent and the need to have swift and effective sanctions against corruption from the imperative of protecting the innocent.
I am sure that the institution of Lokayuktas will emerge as a strong and an effective body in India making useful contribution to enhancing probity in governance and checking corruption as well as maladministration.
I extend my best wishes for the success of this conference.
It is indeed a pleasure to be here in Kerala, God's Own Country for the Viswa Malayala Mahotsavam, the grand festival of Malayalam.
This is my first visit to Kerala after assuming the office of President.
I am extremely happy that this occasion affords me the opportunity to meet a cross section of the vibrant literary and academic communities present here today.
It is also significant that this Festival is being held on the 56th anniversary of the birth of Kerala, on the basis of linguistic re-organisation on November 1, 1956.
I extend my warm greetings to you all - and through you, to the people of Kerala.
You will deliberate, over the next three days, on the significance, current evolution and development as well as the future of Malayalam.
You will address shared concerns, and you will take initiatives based on your collective sense of what needs to be done.
It is enriched by the heritage and cultural traditions of its constituent societies.
Within this happy co-existence, Malayalam is the essence and embodiment of the rich history, culture, art and heritage of the Malayali people.
The Viswa Malayala Mahotsavam-2012 that is being inaugurated today, celebrates the language and unique cultural identity that is Malayalam.
On this occasion, we are also acknowledging Kerala's unique and ancient history.
It has been a melting pot of cultures and races and linguistic and religious influences.
The Sumerians, one of the earliest urban societies to emerge in the world in Southern Mesopotamia more than 5000 years ago, knew Kerala as a major spice trading centre.
The Aitareya Aranyaka which belongs to the Aitareya Shakha of the Rig Veda composed in the period between 1700-1100 BC is the earliest Sanskrit work that specifically mentions Kerala.
With regard to the language, Malayalam, carvings in the Edakkal Caves in Wayanad provide evidence that the common people of Kerala were expressing themselves in Malayalam at about the end of the 4th century AD.
The earliest known record in Malayalam is an inscription dated to approximately 830 AD.
They agree that Sanskrit words had influenced Malayalam.
It is recorded that although Tamil continued to be used as the literary idiom for some time, eventually, the people's language prevailed in this region and Malayalam became the language of communication for all purposes by the beginning of the early 9th century AD.
But Malayalam's links to Tamil and Sanskrit have endowed it with a number of unique characteristics still evident in the modern language.
Today, an estimated 35 million Malayalam speakers can be found around the world, the majority of them concentrated in India.
In later centuries, a more comprehensive body of Malayalam literary work began to emerge.
Some well-known Malayalam language writers include the classical poets Thunchath Ezhuthachan and Kunjan Nambiar as well as Kumaran Asan of modern period and the novelists C.V. Raman Pillai, Chandu Menon, Vaikom Muhammad Basheer and Thakazhi Sivasankara Pillai.
The latter's works brilliantly portrayed Kerala society and events.
At the same time, there was an equal interest in literary works of other languages.
Not to forget, every major Bengali work of literature has been translated into Malayalam.
Malayalam being one of the most evolved languages of our country, it is but natural that many of the greatest literateurs of our times are Malayalis.
A language, however much it may be enriched with traditional values and heritage, would loose its relevance and popularity if it did not evolve.
A language that is ill equipped to meet the requirements of the new generation, cannot be safe in its hands.
This Mahostavam will, no doubt, address such issues.
I understand a new Malayalam University will start functioning from November 1, 2012 at Tirur and will be dedicated to the study of Malayalam linguistics, literature, performing arts, visual arts and architecture, cultural anthropology and cultural and intellectual heritage studies among others.
I have no doubt that the research and activities in this University will positively impact the preservation and propagation of Malayalam.
I see the Viswa Malayala Mahostavam as a very timely initiative in this context.
Kerala is rightly referred to as a land blessed with the bounties of nature and a people who have proven themselves to be at the forefront of social and educational reforms.
This is the first state in the country to attain cent percent literacy.
For Malayalis within the state - and more than 30 lakh who are spread across the world, I am sure that this sammelan will provide a platform to share experiences, hopes and aspirations.
You will, no doubt, use this occasion to set the agenda and the goals to be achieved through this platform.
I once again wish you all a very purposeful sammelan and look forward to hearing of its successful outcome.
With these words, I inaugurate the Viswa Malayala Mahotsavam-2012.
I understood this to be a remarkably effective method of outreach which has proven to be successful and result oriented.
It has become widely known as a focused grass-root level campaign to encourage reading and love for books among the young.
I was struck by its simplicity - and its evolution from a small reading room in a village into a movement for mass literacy - which shows that it has been embraced by the people for whom it is meant.
They have not only responded, but taken full advantage of it.
It is hardly any surprise that this programme of mass contact has successfully instilled in the young people in Kerala, a thirst for learning and a scientific temper by taking knowledge and the instruments of learning to those who have no access to them.
From the Travancore Library Association that he founded in 1945 with 47 rural libraries, he developed a series of similar units which has now grown into a network of 6000 libraries and a tremendously successful movement for total literacy in Kerala.
I am delighted to be here in this beautiful complex, which combines traditional architecture and modern technology.
I am happy to know that the Kerala Legislature has a Golden Jubilee Museum, perhaps the first for any State Legislature in India.
I am given to understand that the museum building has been declared as a heritage building and it also has a newly built section that showcases the history of Kerala's democratic institutions with the help of state-of the-art technology.
I am also happy to know that the State Legislature has set up a Training Cell for imparting education in parliamentary practices and procedures to the legislators.
I am greatly impressed by the Green initiatives being launched by the Kerala Legislative Assembly.
These initiatives reflect the dynamism and enterprise of the Speaker and the willingness of Kerala's legislators to innovate, be responsive to the needs of the time and show leadership in protecting the environment.
You are privileged to be the members of one of the oldest representative bodies in our country.
You are torch-bearers of parliamentary traditions initiated in 1888, in the erstwhile Travancore State.
The representation of people in the Legislative bodies in Travancore and Kochi accelerated the democratic process and paved the way for the establishment of popular Assemblies representing the people's aspirations and will in governance.
Travancore has the credit of having conducted elections on the basis of universal adult franchise way back in 1948, becoming among the first native states of India to do so.
Let me on this occasion remember some of the stalwarts from Kerala who have left a lasting impression on state and national politics like Shri V.K.
Let me take this opportunity to congratulate Kerala on having ensured 50% reservation for women in local bodies.
I also compliment Kerala in ensuring accountability and transparency in administration through the effective implementation of the Right to Services Act.
A steady and stable government is indispensable for the implementation of policies formulated for the integrated development of society.
Kerala has witnessed coalition governments completing their full 5-year term uninterruptedly.
In that respect too, Kerala has shown the country a practical model, which is now being experimented even at the national level.
An important contribution of Kerala in the legislative sphere has also been the system of Subject Committees which has since been adapted into the Parliamentary Standing Committees at the Central level.
I am happy to note that the number of Subject Committees has now increased from 10 to 14 at present.
I am also glad to know that the welfare measures enshrined in the Directive Principles of State Policy has given shape to several welfare committees of the Kerala Legislature.
The establishment of Committees for the welfare of Senior Citizens, Non-Resident Keralites, Fishermen, Women and the physically challenged are praise-worthy.
I am informed that the Kerala Assembly has met 3000 days since 1957 and has the record of having an average of 53/54 days of sitting in a year.
Though it is ahead of other state legislatures in this regard, there is considerable scope for further improvement.
The Presiding Officers Conferences have time and again reiterated the need for holding a minimum of 100 days of sittings every year.
I appeal to the Legislators to strive and do their best in this regard.
Kerala is proud of its achieving 100% literacy.
I hope the Legislators of this Assembly will take up 100 days of sittings as a similar challenge and strive to achieve this goal.
Being a representative of the people is a matter of privilege and a great honour.
This privilege however carries with it great responsibility.
The job of a legislator is a 24/7 responsibility.
They have to be sensitive and responsive to the problems and concerns of the people, give voice to their grievances, hardships and problems by raising them on the floor of the Legislature and act as the link between the people and the Government.
The Constitution of India places the Legislative Assembly at the centre of governance in a State and conceives of it as the primary instrument of socio-economic change.
The primary responsibility of State Legislature is to enact laws required for good governance and administration of the State.
List-2 of the Seventh Schedule of our Constitution lists 66 items for State administration and legislation.
There is need for utmost caution in matters of legislation, money and finance.
Elected representatives have exclusive control over money and finance.
With the heightened complexity of administration and legislation, Legislators must ensure adequate discussion and scrutiny before passing of legislation.
It is sad that across the country, time devoted by legislators towards legislation has been gradually declining.
The Legislative Assembly is also the master of the Executive in the sense that the Chief Minister along with his Council of Ministers is accountable collectively and severally to the Legislative Assembly.
The Executive can be unseated at any time by passing a resolution of No Confidence in the State Legislative Assembly by a simple majority.
Moreover, most of the instruments of governance are executed through appropriate laws passed by Legislatures.
The Executive's dependence on Legislature is total and it is essential that legislatures are responsible and responsive to this huge task entrusted on it by the Constitution to keep the wheels of our democratic functioning moving smoothly.
Parliamentary practices, procedures and conventions are all meant to provide for orderly and expeditious transaction of business.
The imperative of maintaining discipline and decorum in the House and the observance of rules, conventions and etiquette can hardly be over-emphasised.
Dissent is a recognized democratic expression, but it should be expressed with decency and within the contours and parameters of parliamentary devices.
The cardinal principle of effective functioning of Parliamentary system is that majority will rule and minority will oppose, expose and if possible, depose.
But this should be done within the framework of rules framed by Legislatures themselves.
The minority has to accept the decisions of the majority while the majority has to respect the views of the minority.
Disruption should never be allowed to be used as an effective Parliamentary intervention.
It should be the endeavour of every legislator to ensure that the content and the quality of debates that take place in the chambers are of a high order befitting their status as people's representatives.
As members of different political Parties, individual Legislators would be guided by their respective Party's manifesto and policies.
However, there are a large number of issues of development and public welfare, which transcend all political barriers.
The entire Assembly must work jointly for the benefit of the people, the State and the country.
It demands a certain devotion to work.
But it demands also a large measure of cooperation, of self-discipline, of self-restraint.
There may be issues that agitate the minds of the members and naturally they want to bring these to the notice of the House.
Sometimes, you may feel frustrated about the lack of opportunities for participating effectively in the proceedings.
But remember that even to avail that limited opportunity the House has to function.
It does not behove a people's representative to indulge in unruly behaviour or to use unparliamentary language on the floor of the House.
Frequent adjournments of the House and unruly behaviour by members create a negative impression in the minds of the people, particularly with proceedings now being telecast live.
Such incidents can only accentuate the feeling of cynicism among the citizens, particularly among the youth about the viability of our system of governance itself.
We must bear in mind that the most important element that goes into the sustenance of the system is the people's faith in the effectiveness of the system and its ability to address their hopes and concerns.
There is need for collective thinking by political parties and leaders of our country on how to ensure smooth running of our Parliament and Legislative Assemblies and whether some of the existing rules need to be amended for the purpose.
We should also examine whether our Committees can consider post-approval scrutiny of budgetary allocations made to various Ministries.
What we need for the successful working of Parliamentary democracy is more and more legislators with skill, ability, wisdom and a high degree of integrity.
We need to be ever vigilant about the rising expectations of the people.
Welfare of the people, who are our real masters, should be the ultimate and common goal.
As Nobel laureate Amartya Sen has said Kerala is a shining example of the use of public action leading to equitable distribution of social and human development and a high quality of life, despite relatively low industrialization.
Kerala has been a pioneer and a path-breaker in many fields.
Near universal literacy and enrolment in schools has been achieved.
Fertility rate of its people has declined below replacement level.
The overall sex ratio is in favour of women and women enjoy higher life expectancy than men.
Infant and maternal morality is low.
Kerala's economic growth rate is higher than the national average.
Tourism as well as information technology have been a particular success in recent times.
Kerala has the highest per-capita readership of newspapers and periodicals.
It is home to rich and vibrant literary, theatrical and cinematical culture as well as enterprising and socially conscious people.
These remarkable achievements have been made possible, among other things because of the inspiring leadership provided by this State Legislature and your illustrious predecessors.
There is however no time for complacency.
Kerala continues to confront a number of challenges.
Political violence has been a major topic of debate recently.
There is a need to restore faith in the process of democratic and peaceful political participation.
Industrialization and creation of jobs needs to gather speed.
The remittance revenue from non-resident Keralites have to be channelized into long term development activities and building of infrastructure.
Problems of developed economies like life style diseases, mental illness, depression, suicides, divorces etc are on the rise.
With an aging population, care of the elderly is a major concern.
Rapid urbanization in this densely populated state has resulted in growing conflicts of various kinds including on the critical issue of waste management and disposal.
In the past, Kerala has led the country through progressive legislation, social welfare measures and impressive achievements in the field of education and health.
The time has now come for the State to also show leadership in addressing these second generation challenges by finding innovative solutions and new methods of mobilizing society for collective welfare.
I am sure all of you are fully conscious of your responsibilities and will strive ceaselessly to honour your solemn commitment to the people of Kerala.
I am very happy to be here today to inaugurate the Golden Jubilee Celebrations of this prestigious Institution.
Distinguished Guests,
He wanted to propagate the motto of the Jesuit Society - to imbue in students the elements that would help them to transcend the goals of money, faith and success and create leaders devoted to the betterment of society and the world.
I am happy to learn that Loyola College, Trivandrum has lived up to this vision, blending education and praxis, learning and intervention.
The college has steadfastly pursued the triple goals of teaching, research and extension.
I am also happy to see that as a pioneer teaching institute the Loyola College has trained thousands of social workers, social scientists and personnel managers - who have themselves carried forward and extended this training through projects and initiatives in collaboration with associates in India and abroad.
I would, nevertheless, take this opportunity to remind the young trainees and students of the Loyola College to pause and consider some of the challenges that still needs to be addressed.
For example, despite its high literacy rate of 86 percent, Kerala has a relatively low profile of women in public life.
Statistics show a concentration of women in the unorganized sectors including agricultural labour, cottage and traditional industries and selected service sectors where equal pay for equal work is unfortunately not well established.
A perceptible marginalization of women in the economic process and their low level of control over resources have been major impediments in improving their status in Kerala.
This is despite the generally progressive political environment in Kerala.
There needs to be more active involvement of women in various leadership levels in the State.
A good step in this direction is the reservation of 50% of seats in local bodies and Panchayats for the women.
As an institution of Social Sciences ranking 6th among the best colleges in this field, it is incumbent upon the graduating classes today to be all the more conscious of their social responsibility.
As enlightened alumni of the Loyola College, you have a head start - and can do more for the building of a socialist, secular democratic society not only in Kerala but all over India.
I call upon you to commit yourselves to more outreach, new projects and a wider range of activities at multiple levels in society.
For around 57 years, he commented day after day on the national scene, chronicling the modern history of India through some of its momentous phases.
Kutty spent much of his career in Delhi.
As a veteran cartoonist with a Central Hall pass, he was a regular presence in Parliament House.
I am told way back in the 1960s, the late Kamaraj ji asked Kutty in a lighter vein who his choice for Prime Minister was.
I have been a recurring target of Kutty's cartoons in my long years in public life, particularly because he drew for Bengali newspapers like Ananda Bazar Patrika and Aaj Kal.
It is the job of a cartoonist to convey important social messages by using humour as a tool.
Laughter is a stress buster for the public as well as the politician.
The cartoon reminds the public that the ruler is as fallible and human as they are.
The cartoon came to us as part of British legacy.
It however found a receptive Indian mind awaiting it.
Humour magazines blossomed in many parts of the country modeled on the London Punch.
By one estimate as many as 70 Punch-like magazines and newspapers had appeared in at least a dozen Indian towns by the end of 19th Century.
We had the Urdu Punch, Awadh Punch and Parsee Punch.
I am sure it would be of interest to this gathering that we have discovered in our Rashtrapati Bhavan Library a rare collection of Punch magazines published from 1843 to 1927.
We are in the process of restoring these magazines and would be happy to open them out for viewing by cartoonists and scholars of modern history as soon as they are ready.
Till about the late 1980s, a leader was recognised more by her caricature than the photograph.
So much so that the older leaders collected and displayed their caricatures in their workplace.
They could live with their own funny pictures, and because they found in the popular cartoon a ready connect to the public.
I myself had cartoons of me drawn by Laxman on my walls till recently.
A cartoonist like Kutty put across his comment sharply but with refreshing humour and he as well as his guru, Shankar, passed on this culture to succeeding generations of cartoonists.
To be able to lampoon without hurting, caricature without distorting, to say with a few strokes of the brush what lengthy editorials fail to express-this is the art of the cartoonist.
Cartoonists hold up the mirror to our public life and help us as a nation to see ourselves.
We, as a country, must return to the Nehruvian times; cultivate a temper which welcomes criticism, where comment is free but facts are held sacred.
Some draw without intent to draw blood; some remove masks and hold a mirror to the face of the society.
I conclude by paying tribute to the contribution made by Shri Kutty to the modern cultural and political history of our country.
As a person from Kerala, who lived in Delhi and drew cartoons for Bengali newspapers (even though he spoke no Bengali), Shri Kutty was a quintessential Indian.
His life and works were not limited by linguistic or State boundaries.
Distinguished Guests from Spain,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It gives me great pleasure to extend a very warm welcome to His Majesty, King Juan Carlos on his second State Visit to India.
Your Majesty, King Juan Carlos, you are a long standing friend of India.
Under your stewardship, your Government has remained committed to building a strong and enduring relationship with India.
We have, together, taken steady steps to build and expand our linkages and bonds of trade, tourism and investments.
These have been based on a strong foundation of well established people to people contacts developed over the centuries.
Had Captain Christopher Columbus discovered the route to India instead of America, perhaps the history of our relationship may, too, have taken quite a different course.
Your Majesty's presence here today is an important milestone.
The international scenario has transformed itself through the dramatic political developments that have taken place; our world has shrunk significantly through the IT and telecommunications revolution and globalization has permanently altered the way we do things.
Having presided over a remarkable transition to parliamentary monarchy in Spain, you have remained the symbol of the unity and permanence of the Spanish State.
You have safeguarded the institution of the Parliament and preserved democracy in your country.
You have strongly repudiated attempts to unsettle the democratic processes and institutions outlined by your Constitution and ratified by the Spanish people.
Under your leadership, Spain has come to be recognized as an outstanding example of a democracy organized in the form of a parliamentary government under a constitutional monarchy.
We have successfully taken advantage of these to our mutual benefit.
Our peoples have been fortunate partners and our Governments have a shared interest in the success of their initiatives and joint ventures in every sector.
We both recognize the need to preserve the gains of globalization and to work bilaterally and multilaterally to shape a new global agenda for inclusive and sustained growth.
We would like to create a path for future development that goes beyond recovery from the current crisis.
Although it is natural for some Governments to resort to protectionist measures for short term gains, they are increasingly acknowledging that in the longer term, it is counter productive to erect barriers to movement of people, services, and capital.
Many international financial institutions are currently facing a resource crunch.
This is, therefore, the time for effective solutions and even reform of those institutions.
Democratic societies such as ours have the inherent ability to convert challenges into opportunities during difficult times.
Spain's commitment to the Euro-project has sent out a strong and positive signal - as also the fact that you are taking all the necessary steps to overcome the debt crisis.
In India, similarly, a number of reforms - that have been introduced recently, bear testimony to our own determination to overcome the global economic slowdown.
We are committed to providing an enabling environment for business and industry to invest in India.
Spain has developed cutting edge technologies and possesses expertise in diverse areas such as infrastructure, renewable energy, agriculture, water treatment, and solid waste management.
These are areas of priority interest for India.
We welcome Spain's interest in India.
Our Government reciprocates the sentiment.
Terrorism has emerged as one of the biggest threats to international peace and security.
Sadly our two countries have, repeatedly, been victims of some of its most deadly manifestations.
To defeat this menace, the global community must take concerted action against terrorists and their sponsors.
Though he never had occasion to visit Spain, I am told that his ideals and philosophy have found a permanent place in the hearts of communities across Spain.
The 150th birth anniversary of another great Indian, Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore, was celebrated last year in commemorative events across the continents.
We were happy to learn that a priceless collection of Tagore memorabilia owned by a collector in Galicia, Dr. Jose Paz has been donated to the Casa de la India where it will be preserved and displayed.
Your Majesty, we welcome the interest taken by the people of Spain in India's rich culture and heritage.
We appreciate the contribution of Casa Asia in organising activities for cultural and educational exchanges between our societies.
I would like to recognize the role played by Casa de la India, a cultural foundation supported by both our Governments, as a platform for dialogue and mutual understanding between our peoples.
They are avidly following Spain's impressive achievements in the field of football and share your pride at achieving the position of reigning World and European football champions.
I am confident that the strong affinities and substantial potential will take the abiding friendship between our peoples to a new level.
The agreements that have been signed today will set the agenda for our work ahead.
I do look forward to a mutually beneficial and productive partnership between our two Governments - that will further our growth and bring more progress and prosperity to our peoples.
I am confident that your visit will give an impetus to the efforts of our respective Ministries to engage, take new initiatives and enhance bilateral co-operation.
With these few words, I once again welcome you, Your Majesty and your distinguished delegation.
- to the progress and prosperity of the friendly people of Spain; and
- to lasting friendship between India and Spain.
I am very happy to be present at the 40th convocation of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences.
This Institute is a tribute to the vision of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and Raj Kumari Amrit Kaur who foresaw the need for an institution that can emerge as the trail blazer for medical education and research in the country.
AIIMS is also a living tribute to the faculty, staff and students who have, over the years, worked selflessly to bring the Institute to its present position of pre-eminence.
It is due to their efforts that this Institute stands out as a beacon of hope and succour for the thousands who throng its corridors seeking relief from their maladies and sufferings.
I am honoured to have been invited to address the Convocation of an Institute with such glowing credentials.
The Convocation marks the fruition of your hard work and your transition from students to professionals, from scholars to scientists.
You now don the mantle of disseminators of the knowledge and skills acquired at the institute from your teachers and mentors.
While you must rejoice and celebrate your achievements, you must also realize the enormity of responsibility that has been placed upon you.
The baton of knowledge and skills, that you have received and the values you have imbibed must be carried with the same spirit and zeal as has been done by your teachers.
No other Institute is so intensely watched by government, the Parliament, the media and by the public at large as AIIMS as they all see AIIMS as a symbol of excellence in medical sciences.
The country expects the Institute, its faculty and students to live up to this illustrious image.
AIIMS must rise to be one of the 10 best medical universities in the world by the year 2020.
The target is ambitious but not insurmountable.
I charge you-the faculty, the scientists, the scholars, the students and the staff, to focus on this singular goal.
While we stand today at the cusp of greatness in several fields on the global platform, our energy and innovation thrust in the field of medical sciences is yet to scale the heights.
We look upon AIIMS to lead India to the frontiers of innovative solutions in health care, discovering new cures, harnessing existing and emerging technologies for affordable healthcare, and exploring new paradigms for preventing disease and creating wellness.
AIIMS should be a power house of biomedical research and a role model for others.
This role is germane to the Institute's identity as a biomedical sciences university-and this places you in an altogether different league.
It is good that AIIMS is setting up its second campus at Jhajjar in Haryana.
We should develop world class centres of excellence focused not only on traditional specialties but also on cross-cutting themes such as infectious diseases, vaccine development and regenerative sciences.
You must step forward and become leaders in the world of medicine.
The government will support you in this endeavour in every possible way but the faculty and scientists of AIIMS must show that it can push frontiers of biomedical research and innovation to the highest orbit.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Progress in the health sector is key to India's future place of prominence in the world.
Nation's productivity depends on the health and well-being of its citizens.
Economic growth that does not go hand in hand with reduction in avoidable mortality and ill health is neither sustainable nor desirable.
It is unacceptable that almost 80% of the expenditure on healthcare by our people is met by personal, out of pocket, payment.
I am shocked to note that as many as 4 crore people of our country plunge into poverty each year due to expenses on medical treatment.
Yet, we should remember that the health services for the poor cannot be poor health services.
We need to craft a high quality national health system that is used by the poor and the rich alike.
It is possible today to leverage reasonable amount of resources to make bold and sustained investment in health.
I visualize public spending on health rising to 2.5% of the GDP by the end of the Twelfth Plan period.
For this, the public health system must be greatly expanded and strengthened across the Nation.
We need many more nurses, doctors, paramedics and health workers.
We need to decentralize planning and implementation of healthcare to the district and sub-district levels.
We need to take health services closer to the homes of the families-even a primary health centre is too far by today's standard and need.
We need out of the box managerial and administrative reforms in the health departments at the state and central level.
We need public health professionals to spearhead public health programs.
We need to develop effective models of healthcare for the ever-increasing urban population.
The foundation of India's national health system must be a strong, sensitive and efficient public health system.
I call upon all stakeholders to join hands to build a solid consensus for a historic transformation of India's health sector in the coming years.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The uniqueness of AIIMS stems from its being people-centric in its functioning.
The Institute's contribution to national programmes including the Integrated Child Development Services, Iodine Deficiency Disease Control program, Reproductive and Child Health, diarrheal disease, health of the elderly, AIDS control and the non communicable diseases is noteworthy.
However, the new challenges of the country's health sectors are opportunities for the Institute not only in its zeal for excellence but to contribute towards nation building.
Excellence should not be confined to Delhi but must touch the hearts of the millions all over the country who are still struggling for equitable access to quality health care.
I urge the Health Ministry, the Indian Council of Medical Research and the Institute to work in unison.
Research synergized with field experience should seamlessly flow into the national health programmes.
Research must not only be acclaimed by the academia, but must benefit the public at large.
I urge them to live this dream for the nation by dedicating themselves to the service of mankind.
You, as we all do, owe it to our great country.
I congratulate the Petrotech Society for their contribution to the development of the hydrocarbon sector in India and its integration with the global hydrocarbon industry.
I also welcome the recognition being accorded today to five eminent persons in this sector - in the form of Lifetime Achievement Awards - for their leadership and significant contribution to the Oil and Natural Gas Sector in India.
Today, again, India's energy sector is at a critical juncture.
There is, on one hand, a growing demand for energy and at the same time a set of challenging resource constraints which call for a reshape of the matrix of our energy policy.
Our nation's response and the time that we will need to develop new technologies and reset the overall energy matrix will have to be carefully calibrated.
This calls for coordinated action, efficient planning and massive investment.
Government of India's New Exploration Licensing Policy launched in 1997-98 has seen investment of over USD 14 billion and has resulted in 87 oil & gas discoveries.
NELP has all the ingredients of a favourable investment climate, fiscal stability, transparency of the rule of law, contract stability, minimal policy induced uncertainties and a stable legal and regulatory framework.
The refining sector in India, too, has witnessed a silent revolution.
India has, over the years, developed into a major export hub.
With a refining capacity of 215 million metric tonnes per annum, exports of petroleum products have now crossed 60 million tonnes, fetching revenue of close to USD 60 billion.
It has emerged as the single largest component of merchandise exports from India.
This has had a salutary effect on the ambient air quality in our cities.
Another significant step by the oil industry towards reducing pollution and improving the environment is substitution of petroleum products with Natural Gas.
As of 31st March 2012, 776 CNG stations are providing CNG to approximately 1.7 million vehicles in 10 States of India.
Virtually the entire public transport in Delhi is currently running on CNG.
Further, Oil Companies are supplying natural gas to approximately 1.9 million households.
The Government is working towards extending fiscal incentives similar to those provided for exploration of oil to all forms of natural gas exploration and exploitation.
Government of India is also currently extending full support to companies acquiring overseas oil and gas assets and imports of LNG.
In the present international environment of rising petroleum prices, greater alignment of prices to global prices is in the interest of both consumers as well as investors.
Government of India is committed to adopt a time-bound programme to achieve this.
I expect the industry to play a helpful role in achieving the Government's objectives.
There must be increased understanding of the fact that the path to a more sustainable future will require our society to make a better balance between its energy consumption vis a vis its cost and availability.
Interdependence is central to energy security.
The emergence of major consumers in Asia, mainly India and China, has fundamentally changed the global energy equations.
As a matter of fact, today's winners are companies who have a grip on emerging new technologies.
Many industry solutions are being provided by jointly funded research in Universities.
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy and the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India actively support Research and Development projects undertaken by academic institutions as well as industry players.
We should seek to work together with other countries, especially those who are active in the oil and gas sector.
I would suggest to the participants of Petrotech 2012 to explore the possibility of an association of oil and gas companies to deliberate upon such issues of shared interest.
A healthy and viable hydrocarbons sector can help alter our growth trajectory.
Conferences like the Petrotech enable our professionals, both managers and technologists, to keep abreast of the latest developments at global level.
The Indian hydrocarbon sector must be equipped to responsibly deliver ever cleaner, ever more reliable and ever more affordable energy.
I hope that the deliberations of your conference contribute to the building of a vibrant energy sector in India, which can be the bedrock of growth and prosperity.
I wish this conference all success!
With these words, I declare PETROTECH - 2012 open.
On this occasion, my thoughts return to the glorious history of this region.
I am humbled as I remember, with reverence, the great men and women who have walked this land.
This is the land which inspired authors like Valmiki, Vyasa, Tulsidas, Surdas and Bhrigu who lived and composed their thought here.
Distinguished guests and dear students:
I consider it a privilege to be a part of the celebration of the 8th Convocation of this prestigious University.
The King George's Medical University, which is now over 100 years old, has earned a name in the field of medical care, teaching and research, not only in India but internationally.
I am always encouraged and rejuvenated when I interact with the youth of our country for it further strengthens my belief that the future of India is in safe hands.
All of you today who are receiving your degrees and awards are some of the best and the brightest of our land.
This Convocation marks the end of one phase of your life but, more importantly, the beginning of another wherein you will not only define yourselves in your quest for professional excellence but will also carry along the hopes, aspirations and dreams of resurgent India.
India has made significant progress since Independence.
Our achievements in Agriculture, Industry, Trade, Defence, Space and Atomic Energy have been exceptional.
We are known the world over for our talented reservoir of scientists, doctors and IT professionals.
With our fast growing economy and democratic institutions of State, which have withstood the test of time, we are well on our way to being a leading economic power.
There are, however, many challenges that we need to confront and many battles that we need to fight before we can truly claim to have elevated the quality of life of our people.
Provision of universal healthcare is one such challenge and, therefore, one of the top most priorities for Government.
The Eleventh Plan had noted that though the total expenditure on health in India, as a percentage of GDP, was around 5%, there was a disproportionately high reliance on private, particularly household's out of pocket expenditure on health.
This reflected a critical imbalance in the health care system which stemmed from deficiencies in the public sector's capacity to deliver basic health care.
The National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) launched in 2005 aimed at strengthening healthcare infrastructure in rural areas.
As per data available, Public Health expenditure is likely to have reached 1.4% of GDP by the end of the Eleventh Plan period.
We now aim at raising the public health expenditure to 2.5% of GDP by the end of the Twelfth Plan period.
Lack of human resources is as responsible for inadequate provision of health services as lack of physical infrastructure, especially in rural areas.
The density of doctors in India is only 0.6 per 1,000 and that of nurses and midwives 1.30 per 1000, representing collectively 1.9 health workers per 1,000 pointing clearly to the acute shortage of healthcare professionals.
In addition, because of a skewed distribution of cadres of health workers, the vulnerable populations in rural, tribal and hilly areas continue to be under-served.
We must, therefore, ensure a sizeable expansion in teaching institutions for doctors, nurses and paramedics.
The on-going initiatives for integrating AYUSH and capacity development of the traditional healthcare providers need strengthening.
Positive traditional healthcare practices and local remedies need to be encouraged.
The Central Government is also providing financial assistance to State Governments for strengthening and up-gradation of Government medical colleges to enable them to create new Post Graduate seats and start new Post Graduate Departments.
Distance learning should be encouraged and popularised-as also extension services in rural areas.
Non-Government Organizations and private sector entrepreneurs should also step up their involvement in an effort to share responsibility and make a contribution.
We also need to devise effective and sustainable solutions to the existing and emerging health problems faced by our vast population.
This would need innovations in preventive approaches, treatments and rehabilitation.
The frontiers of science and technologies must be extended for improving the health of the people, especially the poor.
People must be at heart of advances in health and delivery of healthcare.
The new challenges of the country's health sectors are opportunities for the Institute to further contribute towards nation building.
Excellence of this institution should not be confined to Lucknow only but must touch the hearts of the millions all over the State who are still struggling for equitable access to quality health care.
I would like to leave these thoughts with you as I extend my best wishes to the graduating students and awardees in their future endeavours.
Thank you,
Jai Hind!
Ladies and Gentlemen,
This beautiful structure stands on sacred soil, which was once ruled by the great queen Kittur Chennamma, who challenged the colonial powers.
Lokmanya Bal Gangadhar Tilak launched the Home Rule League from Belgaum in 1916 with the words Freedom is my birthright.
Encouraged by the Congress session, people from Belgaum took active part in the freedom movement.
I understand Belgaum used to be known as Venu Grama (Village of the flute).
Today, this region is the Sugar bowl of the State.
It has made immense contribution to Karnataka's history, education, literature, culture and economy.
True to its name, Belgaum is known for music, especially Hindustani music.
Many stalwarts like Kumar Gandharva, Mallikarjuna Mansur, Gangubai Hangal and Bhimsen Joshi come from this area and have added glory to Indian classical music.
The Belgaum session of the Indian National Congress witnessed a Kannada song by Gangubhai Hangal.
The 12th century thinker, social reformer, saint and religious teacher Basaveshwara lived in this part of the State and brought about sweeping social change in Karnataka and surrounding region.
This Suvarna Soudha is inheritor of a proud and glorious tradition.
Democratic process started in erstwhile Mysore state much before the rest of the country.
Maharaja Chamaraj Wadiyar established the Mysore Representative Assembly way back in 1881 and his son Maharaja Krishnaraj Wadiyar established a Legislative Council in 1907.
Erstwhile Mysore was amongst the first princely states in India to start the formation of democratic institutions with a view to associating representatives of the people in the process of administration.
This Representative Assembly saw several transformations and evolved into a mature house of legislation which is what we see today in the form of the bi-cameral house of Karnataka Legislative Assembly and Karnataka Legislative Council.
I hope the northern districts of the State will now be much closer to governance and this will ensure balanced growth and development of the State by removing social, economical and educational imbalances.
Thank you.
Jai Hind!
It is an honour and a privilege to address this august body of the Karnataka legislature.
The erstwhile rulers of Mysore heralded the dawn of Representative Assembly as early as 1881.
The Maharajas of Mysore were known for their benevolence and people oriented welfare measures.
The present Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council carry on the tradition of the Representative Assembly.
The Karnataka Legislature has set a tradition of high standards by introducing various progressive legislations.
It is to the credit of this august body that legislations enacted here like the Land Reforms Act, Abolition of Manual Scavenging, Reservation in Education and Employment to the Backward Classes etc., have been acclaimed and emulated by many States as well as the National Government.
Elected Parliaments and legislature are the most critical ingredient of any true democracy.
In our political system, Legislators are representatives of the people.
They are entrusted with the responsibility for enacting legislations, discussing issues of governance and public interest, acting as a voice of the people and redressing their grievances through the legislative forum.
The responsibility of ensuring that actions of the Government are in harmony with the wishes and interests of the people rests with elected representatives.
It is through the effective discharge of their duties that the Rule of Law becomes a living reality of our society.
Legislators must always remember that they act as Trustees of the public and that they need to be exemplary models of good conduct and responsible behaviour.
Part VI Chapter 3, Articles 168 to 177 of the Constitution of India deals with the general provisions governing the State Legislatures.
While there is some uniformity in the composition and functioning of the State Legislatures, there does exist distinction between the bigger States and the smaller States.
Since the beginning, some of the bigger States enjoyed bicameral legislatures consisting of both Legislative Assemblies and Legislative Councils but in course of time, some of the States opted for unicameral legislatures like West Bengal.
In the case of Andhra Pradesh, it started with a bicameral legislature but in mid-eighties, it switched over to unicameral legislature and again recently they have reverted to bicameral legislature.
Karnataka has bicameral legislature right from the beginning.
In fact, even during the days of Maharajas, Karnataka had both Assembly and Council.
Currently, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka Uttar Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir have bicameral legislatures.
The primary responsibility of State Legislature is to enact laws required for good governance and administration of the State.
The List-2 of the Seventh Schedule consists of 66 items for State administration and legislation.
Now-a-days, with heightened complexity of administration both in governance and legislations, the legislators must be careful in passing the legislations.
It is a time consuming process both at the Committee stage and during discussions on the floor of the House.
The trend being noticed now, which is not good for democracy, is that the time devoted by legislators towards legislation has gradually been declining.
Legislators must always remember that as representatives of the people and custodians of public interests and rights, they have to be extremely careful in matters of legislation, money and finance.
Elected representatives of the people, particularly in Legislative Assemblies, have exclusive control over money and finance.
No expenditure can be incurred by the Executive without approval of Legislature, no tax can be levied except by a law passed by the Legislature and no money can be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of the State without the approval of the Legislature.
Legislature exercises this authority through Budget and other Money Bills.
Legislature, particularly the Legislative Assembly, is the master of the Executive in the sense that the Chief Minister along with his Council of Ministers is accountable collectively and severally to the Legislative Assembly.
The Executive can be unseated at any time by passing a resolution of No Confidence in the State Legislative Assembly by a simple majority.
Most of the instruments of governance are executed through appropriate laws passed by Legislatures.
Therefore, Executive's dependence on Legislature is total.
Legislatures must be responsible and responsive to this huge task entrusted on it by the Constitution to keep the wheels of our democratic functioning moving smoothly.
To discharge this responsibility, Legislature must meet frequently.
The work which can be done through Committees should be done at that stage and the core business of Legislature should be accomplished through regular sittings.
Therefore, sittings of Legislature should be more frequent and they should meet at least for 20 to 25 weeks in a year.
It is a sad commentary, going by the recent trends which we are noticing, that the legitimate functioning of the Legislative bodies is jeopardized by fewer number of days in session.
Another disturbing trend noticed now-a-days is the frequent disruptions in the proceedings of the House.
There may be occasions when normal business of the House is suspended to take up an urgent issue on which a large number of Members are agitated.
But such occasions should be few and far between.
In the rules of procedure of every Legislature, there are adequate provisions to raise issues of urgent public importance on the floor of the House in an orderly manner.
Members can utilize those provisions to raise those issues in which they are interested but disruption of proceedings by frequent adjournments cannot be justified.
Cardinal principle of effective functioning of Parliamentary system is majority will rule and minority will oppose, expose and if possible, depose.
But this should be done within the framework of rules framed by Legislatures themselves.
Disruption should never be allowed to be used as an effective Parliamentary intervention.
Our Governance mechanisms must become citizen friendly, quick and accountable.
Such long term planning is critical to ensure that the state makes steady progress and is fully prepared to meet the challenges of the future.
Karnataka's strides in the area of e-Governance, empowerment of Panchayati Raj Institutions and Rural Development have been acclaimed nationally.
It is a State where intellectual prowess co-exists with rich cultural heritage.
Higher Institutions of Learning and Research like the Indian Institute of Science, ISRO, DRDO, HAL, CSIR Laboratories, Indian Institute of Information Technology and a number of Scientific, Health and Educational Institutions have over the years produced a vast pool of talented and skilled workforce.
From the time of Sir M. Vishweshariah, Karnataka has a strong industrial base.
It is today also known across the world as home to India's vibrant IT industry.
People of Karnataka have proven themselves as excellent entrepreneurs and also attracted to the State the best of talent from across the country and the world.
The State of Karnataka is heir to remarkable natural and human resources.
It is therefore incumbent on the leadership of the State to ensure that its full potential is exploited.
All stakeholders of the State must develop a consensus on a long term vision and back it up with suitable strategies so that the development dreams of its people can become a reality.
A vibrant and prosperous Karnataka is a goal which can be achieved in the near term and it is the legislature more than any other institution which can ensure rapid progress towards this objective.
There is nothing that stands in the way of development of this State if all join together and fulfill their duties and responsibilities towards the people and engage themselves in the cause of building a peaceful and prosperous Karnataka.
I understand that Kannada has the highest number of awardees amongst regional languages and is next only to Hindi.
This achievement should be a matter of pride and joy for all members of the Kannada literary fraternity and all Kannada speakers in India and across the world.
Dr. Chandrashekhara Kambar joins the band of illustrious Kannada writers comprising Kuvempu, D.R.Bendre, K. Shivarama Karanth, Masti Venkatesha Iyengar, V.K.Gokak, U.R.Anantha Murthy and Girish Karnad who have received this award in the past.
These writers and their works are a glowing testimony to the richness of Kannada literature.
Dr. Chandrashekar Kambar is an icon not just in Karnataka but across India.
He subsequently not only taught in the University of Chicago and Bangalore University but also became the Vice-Chancellor of the Kannada University at Hampi for two terms.
Dr. Kambar has won many awards during his literary career and has been honoured by the nation with a Padmashri.
He is well-known as a poet, playwright, short-story writer, novelist, folklorist and film-director.
In his writings, he has retained the earthy flavour of rural Karnataka.
Dr. Kambar has portrayed through his writings the subjects of conflict between tradition and modernity, identity, feudal decay and colonialism.
He has presented in all his writings the perspective and world view of the down trodden.
Dr. Kambar's multi-faceted genius can be seen in the fact that he has directed a number of movies based on his works, and also composed music for them.
He has produced several documentaries for the State and Central governments.
His elevation to the post of Chairman of the National School of Drama and the Karnataka Nataka Akademi speaks of his accomplishments in the field of theatre.
I am delighted to know that a good number of his works have been translated into English and prominent Indian languages like Hindi, Marathi, Telugu, Tamil, Punjabi, Malayalam and Rajasthani.
The Sahitya Akademi is doing commendable work to promote translations between Indian languages.
But, that is not enough.
State Governments, authors, translators, lovers of literature and the publishing industry should work together to ensure that the literature of our vernacular languages, both modern and classical, is available to readers in all corners of India.
I am sure Dr. Kambar with his vast experience can guide efforts in this regard.
The Jnanpith Award instituted in 1961 by Bharatiya Jnanpith, a trust founded by the Sahu Jain Family is along with the Sahitya Akademi Awards the foremost prize for Indian literature.
I congratulate and compliment the Trustees for having sustained this outstanding initiative for over five decades and taken it from strength to strength.
Literature cannot flourish based on the support of Government alone.
Society at large, philanthropists and the private sector must play their role in nurturing and promoting the treasure of Indian languages and literature that is India's heritage.
We need to do much more to recognize, nurture and promote excellence in writing in Indian languages.
The creativity and talent that is widely present in Indian languages need better platforms and greater exposure.
There is a need to take to the world Indian literature from our vernacular languages.
Indian writing in English has sparked excitement and recognition across the world.
Even greater laurels await us if we can expose the world to the flowering of creativity in our vernacular literature.
I congratulate Dr. Chandrashekhara Kambar and wish him many more years of good health and achievements in his creativity and contributions for the benefit of the vast multitudes.
It gives me great pleasure to be amongst you today on the occasion of inauguration of the 26th Conference of Accountants General.
The Accountants General of the States and their equivalents in the Centre are important functionaries assigned with the task of being watchdogs of public finance.
Being a knowledge based organisation, it is important that the practices followed by the department are continuously updated and universally and fairly applied.
The institution of C&AG is an important part of the governance and accountability structures of our country.
Its existence underpins and highlights the necessity for accountability of public expenditures by public authorities towards Parliament which represents the Supreme will of the people of this country.
One of the main instruments through which Parliament exercises this accountability is the office of the CAG.
It is in recognition of this role that the CAG has been assigned constitutional status by our founding fathers.
A constitutional mandate for the CAG also reflects the high value that we have placed on integrity and transparency in our public life.
All public servants in this country are first and foremost accountable to people.
The rationale for whatever decisions that we take must be empowerment and welfare of our people.
This is absolutely fundamental for any democratic system.
There will be moments in a nation's life when institutions would appear to be under stress but as long as we have faith in our basic democratic values and the supremacy of our people and Parliamentary processes, we shall be able to tide over any crisis that we may face.
From the time we opened up our economy in the Nineties, Government has had to take many decisions of far reaching import the results of which are becoming visible only now.
Financial sector and social sector reforms do not deliver overnight and their full impact on a country's economic and social well-being is felt only over extended periods of time.
Most such reforms also involve use of public money and public resources.
Optimal use of such resources by balancing conflicting demands on such public resources has always been the challenge for the decision makers in all sectors and in all parts of the world.
In a country like India, public administrators have, in addition, the onerous responsibility of actively ameliorating the conditions of the poor and the needy as soon as possible.
As I stated at the time of assuming the office of the First Citizen of our country, trickle down theories of growth will no longer work in the Indian context.
When we talk about optimal decision making, we will do well to keep in mind that, in the long run, use of public money must improve the living conditions of the people.
Governance during the last six decades has become much more complex.
Public expenditure has increased manifold, newer delivery mechanisms have had to be thought of and brought in to reach services to the people.
The range of governmental activities itself has changed manifold.
Before independence, administration was colonial and mainly responsible for revenue collection and law enforcement.
Governments built factories, roads, ports and public infrastructures.
They also directly provided services like health and education.
The thrust on developmental administration from a purely revenue earning and law and order centric administrative system represented a major paradigm shift.
Another major paradigm shift is taking place today.
We have realised that governments alone cannot do everything.
Given the scale of funding required, particularly for infrastructure financing, Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) have emerged as part of the institutional framework.
They represent recognition by the Government of the need to engage with the Private Sector in diverse areas for the purpose of ensuring broad-based and sustainable growth.
This has introduced great complexities in funds flow, expenditure, accounting and evaluation.
In our efforts to reach services to the poor and the needy in the remotest corners of our country, we have had to develop faster channels of service delivery.
There have been occasions when the system was not fully developed, the process of accounting not fully operational, the local officials who handled government money not fully skilled in their multifarious functions.
This is, however, a reality we need to accept and a situation we need to address through continuous capacity building and upgradation of human skills.
I am happy that the C&AG for the past several years has taken a positive approach on this and has not hesitated to offer his helping hand to governments and local bodies in building up and enhancing skills in financial management.
Your department has developed considerable expertise in financial management through your exposure to different organizations.
It is in the fitness of things that the expertise available should be utilised fully.
I hope you continue your efforts in this direction.
Public audit, I am aware, is just one aspect of financial administration.
What is most important is that we must introduce a robust internal control system in all spheres of government activity.
Many significant steps have been taken.
Several state governments have now established full-fledged Internal Audit departments within the Government.
I am sure that the recommendations, once accepted by the Government, will go a long way in making Internal Audit an effective tool of governance and internal control, thereby complementing the role of the CAG.
All these are significant steps towards transparency and good financial administration.
Equity and justice, fairness and transparency, therefore, continue to be cornerstones of our polity.
India is once again on the cusp of change.
The transformational agenda that we have boldly undertaken requires innovation and performance.
It requires huge resources but, more importantly, it requires judicious use of these resources so that we get the optimal outcome from these resources.
Every institution in the government must reorient themselves for these momentous changes and must be ready to contribute.
I am glad that during the past years, CAG's audit has shifted from routine compliance audit to a more macro perspective.
I must, however, stress that while redefining organisational roles and boundaries, all constitutional authorities need to adhere to the fine and calibrated system of checks and balances which forms the bedrock of our governance structures.
Any attempt by any organ of the State to overreach will unnecessarily lead to dissonance within the system.
It is, therefore, necessary that all constitutional authorities introspect on their respective roles.
I am aware of the initiatives of CAG to involve the civil society organizations and the beneficiaries in the audit process.
This enriches the audit process and provides a feedback that is relevant and timely.
You have well trained personnel and wide geographical reach.
What we could all benefit from is a record of the best practices that you would come across in villages, blocks and districts in respect of social programmes so that these practices can be replicated.
Audit reports are essentially feedback on the many programmes undertaken by the government.
The tone and timeliness of such feedback is, therefore, important.
The Central Government releases funds to State Governments and even to the local bodies at district levels.
The utilization of these funds is known to the Central Government only through the mechanism of utilization certificates.
By the time these utilization certificates are received, the programme has already been implemented.
It is thus important that CAG's reports are presented in time so as to enable mid-course corrections, if required.
Through these committees, the Parliament and State Legislative Assemblies exercise the oversight functions that are expected of them.
These institutions have always functioned in a bipartisan manner and have contributed a great deal to the cause of transparency and good governance.
It is an important responsibility of the legislators to ensure that such committees remain active and all important observations of audit are considered with all the seriousness that they deserve.
I am happy to note that C&AG, as the Apex Audit Institution of India, has remained in the forefront of international audit.
Apart from being a member of the Board of Auditors for UN and other Agencies for almost two decades, you have conducted audit of United Nations and many other International Organizations.
You have earned great respect from the international community for your knowledge, skills and high professional calibre.
I acknowledge that the unique institution of CAG has over the years, now more than 150 years old, made significant contribution to ensuring that we have governance systems that are transparent and accountable.
I have great expectations from this Institution in our journey towards a prosperous and equitable future for our people.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am sure that these awards would inspire other entrepreneurs in this important sector of the economy to contribute even more vigorously to the economic development of the country.
I understand that apart from entrepreneurs, exporting companies, Public Sector Banks and the Export Promotion Council, which have rendered support services for the development of exports, have also been awarded.
I congratulate all of them too.
The contribution that this sector makes to employment is of utmost importance to our vision of equitable and inclusive growth.
The export sector is also important as it is a medium to project India in overseas markets as a source of quality products.
Exporters, therefore, must remember that their products encase not only the image of their company or their brand but also, more importantly, the image of India as a source of top quality products.
We must, therefore, at all stages of the value chain imbibe the mantras of quality consciousness, professionalism in service delivery and complete transparency and fairness in our dealings with our trading partners.
The country's financial integration with the world has also been as rapid as its trade globalisation.
Despite a considerable increase in domestic savings rate, there has been a significant increase in the dependence of the economy on the inflow of foreign capital.
It has contributed to the financial intermediation of resources in meeting the growing need for long-term and risk capital, as well as technology for the Indian industry.
The compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of India's exports which was 8.2% in the 1990s increased to 19.5% during 2000-01 to 2008-09.
India's share in global exports also increased from 0.7% in 2000 to 1.5% in 2010.
Its ranking in the leading exporters improved from 31 in 2000 to 20 in 2010.
This diversification helped in maintaining a momentum in export growth in the period after the global financial crisis in 2008, even as the demand for Indian exports in the developed countries was adversely impacted.
After a growth of 13.7 per cent in 2008-09, export growth (in USD) was a negative -3.5 per cent in 2009-10 followed by a strong growth of over 40 per cent and over 21 per cent respectively in 2010-11 and 2011-12.
However, notwithstanding its growing resilience, the experience in more recent months suggests that as India's globalisation deepens, it too cannot escape from the impact of developments abroad.
Moreover, the slowdown in external demand has led to significant deceleration in the growth of exports since November 2011, with export growth becoming negative in three of the first six months of the calendar 2012.
Even as one awaits the recovery of demand in the developed economies India needs to maintain the focus of its trade policy on developing new export markets in the emerging and the developing countries where growth prospects in the medium-term remain considerably better than in the developed countries.
India has been a part of these efforts, working closely with the international community, to restore growth and to reform financial systems.
Our financial systems are strong and several steps to considerably enhance liquidity in the market have been taken.
Measures have also been put in place for export incentives and credit facilities.
I believe Indian exporters have the necessary competitiveness and diversification to operate in a challenging global environment.
I am confident about the prospects of the Indian economy, which continues to be one of the fast growing economies of the world, and also that our export sector will be a part of this growth story.
In addition, we must focus on products of high export intensity which are currently having a low penetration in overseas markets.
Suggestions from the Export Promotion Councils in this regard may be invited.
An interactive and coordinated approach is particularly important in these times of global stress.
I compliment Shri Anand Sharma, Commerce & Industry and Textiles Minister and his Ministries for their continuous efforts for the sustained development of the export potential of our economy.
I am sure that the export sector will continue to contribute to the balanced economic and social development of our country.
We must all work together to take India to newer heights.
Working together, with innovation and dynamism, we can realize our collective destiny to be a great nation.
Thank You,
It is a pleasure to be here today for the inaugural function of India Chem 2012.
It also underlines, very appropriately, that this growth has to be sustainable.
I am glad to see the enthusiastic participation from diverse regions of India and the world.
There is today a global focus on sustainability in the chemical industry.
It is an occasion for all involved in this sector to be informed of global trends, exchange views on green chemistry and showcase their own products and capabilities.
I am confident that the Indian participants have much to share and significant achievements to display.
I am equally confident that interaction at the Conference would sensitize the foreign delegates about the various opportunities offered by India in this sector.
Distinguished guests,
Virtually all sectors of the economy are closely connected if not directly dependent on the chemicals sector for their sustenance.
This sector provides them a variety of raw material and key input in the form of chemical products and enabling technical solutions.
The chemical industry is also one of the most diversified sectors.
Similarly the petrochemicals and plastic industry is making significant contribution to many sectors, including agriculture, horticulture, and healthcare and construction industry.
The development of the chemical industry in India today is, therefore, a key requirement for her progress.
Along with its key consumer industries, this industry, is increasingly locating its units in Asia.
The share of Asia in the global chemical industry has increased from 31% to 45% between 1999 and 2009.
With Asia's increasing contribution to the global chemical industry, India emerges as one of the focus destinations for chemical companies worldwide.
The global chemicals market is estimated at about US$ 3.4 trillion.
The Indian chemical industry is currently estimated to be about US$ 108 billion, that is 3% share of the global market.
This is a very good reason for policy makers and industry to take the lead and prepare a roadmap.
The accelerated growth of this sector should be a priority given the talent pool and current untapped demand within the country.
A key factor in its accelerated growth would be research.
I am told that at present the R&D expenditure in this sector is only about 1-2% of turn-over.
This needs to be addressed.
It is in the larger and long-term interest of the industry to increase its spending on R&D to about 5-6% of the total turn-over.
The aim should be to bring new products that are competitive in the international market.
Efforts should be made to nurture the talent and make sure that the skill development programme matches the growth requirement of the industry.
Distinguished Guests,
Our National Manufacturing Policy envisages increasing the share of manufacturing from the present level of 16% to 25% in GDP by 2025 and creation of 100 million additional jobs by the manufacturing sector by 2022.
The Chemical sector has a very important role to play in this endeavour.
I understand the National Chemical Policy is currently under preparation and will include measures to facilitate this.
I would like to emphasize, that along with growth, the industry must also ensure increased adherence to safety and international health and environmental standards.
The industry must also promote sustainable development by investing in technologies that safeguard the environment and stimulate growth while balancing economic needs and financial constraints.
New technologies are evolving for tackling the problem of industrial waste and the Indian industry should optimally utilize them.
The Indian chemical industry would need to set targets and standards and take up research and collaborations without delay.
This is an occasion for the industry representatives in the fields of Chemicals and Petrochemicals from across the world to come together to share their vision for the future growth of the industry.
I am confident that this three day International Conference would result in fruitful deliberations on all issues concerning the chemical industry from both domestic as well as global perspectives.
I thank the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Government of India and Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) for their initiative in jointly organizing this event.
Shri Mohammed Hamid Ansari, Vice President & Chairman, Rajya Sabha,
Distinguished Speakers and Deputy Speakers participating in this Conference,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I am delighted to join you in inaugurating the 7th Meeting of the Women Speakers of Parliament on Gender Sensitive Parliaments.
Once we achieved independence, an important goal was to achieve the empowerment of women.
The principle of gender equality is enshrined in the Indian Constitution in its Preamble, Fundamental Rights, Fundamental Duties and Directive Principles.
The Constitution not only grants equality to women, but also empowers the State to adopt measures of positive discrimination in favour of women.
But although attempts were made more than two decades ago, it was only in 2010 that the Upper House of the Parliament of India took the historic step of passing a bill to reserve a third of all legislative seats across the country for women.
The bill was passed by 186 votes to 1.
It was a momentous occasion.
One-third of the seats in local bodies are now reserved for women.
With this step, 800,000 women were brought into the political process in a single election.
This is very significant as the gram panchayat, is in my view, the best training ground for future parliamentarians.
This is a vast improvement from only 5 percent in the 1st Lok Sabha.
They would have a better understanding of the issues related to water, fuel, food and income and deal with them with the urgency they deserve.
Similarly, it can safeguard more effectively women's rights to land, leadership, opportunities and choices.
By increasing rural women's leadership and participation in decisions that shape the laws, policies and programmes that affect them, we can enable them to take charge of their own futures.
This has been successfully implemented across the sectors and every line Ministry is required to report on their execution of the gender budgeting stipulations.
This needs to be taken further.
This will be an occasion to exchange information and best practices.
I look forward to the outcome of your work in this conference.
I congratulate Smt Meira Kumar, Speaker of the Lok Sabha for her initiative to host this conference in India.
It is indeed my privilege to be here at the convocation of the Lalit Narayan Mithila University.
Darbhanga is the heartland of Mithila and universally acknowledged as the centre of learning of ancient philosophy.
It is but natural that the Lalit Narayan Mithila University will imbibe and impart this legacy to its students.
I am glad to note that since it was founded in 1972, the University has come a long way.
It has developed 23 teaching departments, 43 Constituent Colleges and 36 affiliated colleges and even provides distance learning.
I am told that the University has a collection of nearly one lakh rare books and manuscripts.
I was glad to note that the University plans to build on regional specializations, provide students with the kind of knowledge and learning that would provide them a variety of opportunities.
Distinguished Guests,
Over 70 per cent of Indians will be of working age in 2025.
Our young demography is an asset and we should prepare this population for their future role by giving them a solid foundation.
For this, increasing the availability of accessible and affordable higher education and providing training in vocational skills is a key requirement.
Government has been providing special grants to recognise excellence in universities and academic institutions.
A National Skill Development Council has been established and given a mandate to create 15 crore skilled workers by 2022.
A National Innovation Council has been set up to prepare a roadmap for innovations in India.
The process of setting up State Innovation Councils in each State and Sectoral Innovation Councils aligned to Central Ministries is underway.
A National Knowledge Network (NKN) will link 1500 Institutes of Higher Learning and Research through an optical fibre backbone.
Government of India, in its Approach to the 12th Five Year Plan, will continue with a threefold strategy of expansion, equity and excellence for higher education.
It has identified revitalisation of the State Universities and Colleges as a critical component of the Plan.
Academic reforms will be prioritized and strengthening of research activity in Universities by establishing mutually-reinforcing linkages between teaching and research will be undertaken.
Technology-enabled learning, and collaborative, information and communication technologies (ICT) will be an area of focus.
To improve the quality of education and learning, Government is proposing pilot projects of Innovation Universities giving them considerable autonomy and freedom and supplementing these with the creation of Centres of Excellence in existing universities.
Resource constraints will make it difficult to meet the need of expanding higher education entirely through the public sector.
While all these initiatives indicate that it is an opportune time for higher education in India, we have to be mindful that in the increasingly competitive international environment of today, it is necessary for our Universities to ensure that the curriculum is carefully crafted.
They should ensure that the courses that they offer are relevant, modern and progressive.
Government of India has prioritized the promotion of quality by focusing on performance, curricular reforms, better human resource management, promotion of quality research and the creation of conducive ambience in order to attract the best talent to its faculty.
It is equally important for Universities to give importance to autonomous research.
It is necessary for Universities to build linkages and collaborations with premier institutions in Indian and abroad.
Their governance, too, should be guided by flexibility and dynamism.
It is important to simultaneously develop moral values along with a scientific temper.
I would only add that, there is, today, a real need for each and every student passing through the portals of this prestigious institution to remind himself, as he receives his degree, of the high expectations that society has of him and his generation.
Each one of you should have a deep sense of purpose and commitment to make your individual contribution to the building of your State and our nation.
I call upon you all to individually and collectively think about this as a noble obligation.
